<h3>
<i>Chapter I</i>
</h3>

<p>
Leading Seaman Albert Brown lay dying on Resolution.
He was huddled in a cleft in the grey-brown lava of which
that desolate island is largely composed, on his back with
his knees half-drawn up in his fevered delirium.  Sometimes
he would mumble a few meaningless words and writhe
feebly on to his side, only to fall back again a second later.
He was dressed in what had once been a sailor's suit of
tropical white, but now it was so soiled and stained and
draggled, so torn and frayed, as literally to be quite
unrecognizable&mdash;it was now only a few thin, filthy rags feebly
held together.  His face was swollen and distorted, as were
his hands, being quite covered with hideous lumps as a
result of the poisoned bites of a myriad of flies&mdash;a little
cloud of which hung murderously over him as he lay,
combining with the shimmering reek of the sun-scorched rock
almost to hide him from view.  His feet, too, although a few
fragments of what were once shoes still clung to them, were
horribly swollen and bruised and cut.  They were more like
sodden lumps of raw horse-flesh than human feet.  Not the
cruellest human being on earth could have contemplated
those dreadful feet without a throb of pity.
</p>

<p>
Yet a very cursory inspection of Albert Brown's dying
body would be enough to show that he was not dying
because of the biting flies, nor even because of the hideous
condition of his feet.  For the dingy rags on his right
shoulder were stained a sinister brown, and when he turned
on his side he revealed the fact that those at his back were
similarly stained, and a closer look through the tatters of
cloth would discover that Brown's right breast was covered
with a black, oozing clot of blood like an empty football
bladder hanging from a bullet wound over Brown's third rib.
</p>

<p>
Brown lay at the edge of the central, lifeless portion of
the island.  Mounting up above him rose the bare lava of
the highest point of Resolution, a distorted muddle of
naked rock bearing a million million razor edges&mdash;razor
edges which readily explained the frightful condition of his
feet.  Just at Brown's level, stretching along at each side (for
Resolution is a hog-backed island bent into a half-moon)
began the cactus, ugly, nightmarish plants, like bottle-nosed
pokers, clustering together thicker and thicker on the lower
slopes, each bearing a formidable armament of spikes
which explained the tattered condition of Brown's clothes.
Frequently, stretched out in the scanty line of shade cast
by the cacti, there lay iguanas&mdash;mottled crested
lizards&mdash;somnolently stupid.  Overhead wheeled sea-birds, and
occasionally a friendly mocking-bird, strayed up from the
lower slopes, would hop close round Brown's dying body
and peer at him in seeming sympathy.  Down at the water's
edge, where the Pacific broke against the lava boulders,
there massed a herd of marine iguanas&mdash;fantastic creatures
which bear only their Latin generic name&mdash;industriously
gnawing the seaweed on which they live, while round them
strayed marvellous scarlet crabs and the other representatives
of the amphibious life of this last, almost unknown
member of the Galapagos Islands.
</p>

<p>
The sky above was of a glaring, metallic blue, in which
hung a burnished sun that seemed to be pouring a torrent of
molten heat upon the tortured fragment of land beneath it.
The sea was of a kindlier blue, and far out near the horizon
could be seen a grey line stretching out of sight in both
directions, which marked the edge of an ocean current,
haunted by sea-birds in hundreds, gathered there to revel
in the food, living and dead, which clustered along this
strange border.
</p>

<p>
No trace of human life could be seen around the whole
wide horizon, save only for Leading Seaman Albert Brown,
huddled in his cleft, and hunger and thirst and fever and
loss of blood were soon to make an end even of him, the
sole representative of the human race in all this wide
expanse; perhaps in years to come some exploring scientist
would happen across his bleached bones and would ponder
over that broken rib and that smashed shoulder-blade.  It is
doubtful, though, whether he would explain them.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter II</i>
</h3>

<p>
It all began more than twenty years earlier, with
Lieut.-Commander R. E. S. Saville-Samarez, R.N., seated in the
train which was carrying him from the Royal Naval
College, Greenwich, and a not very arduous course of professional
study therein, towards London and a not very closely
planned week of relaxation therein.  He sat in his first-class
carriage and looked, now at his newspaper, now out of the
window, now up at the carriage roof, now at the lady who
was seated demurely in the diametrically opposite corner of
the carriage.  For the Commander was not much given to
prolonged reading, nor to prolonged following of any one
train of thought.  He thought, as was only natural, of the
influence of first-class certificates upon promotion, and
from that he passed to the consideration of Seniority versus
Selection, and the Zone System, and he wondered vaguely
if he would ever attain the comfortable security and
majestic authority of Captain's rank with its consequent
inevitable climb upwards to the awesome heights of an
Admiral's position.  Admirals in one way were mere
commonplaces to the Commander, for he came of a long line
of naval ancestors, and an uncle of his was an Admiral at
that moment, and his grandfather had commanded a ship
of the line at Cronstadt during the Crimean War, and his
grandfather had fought at the Nile and had been an
Admiral during the reign of George IV.
</p>

<p>
But he did not think long about Admirals, for he felt
oddly restless and fidgety, and he wished that the lady was
not in his carriage so that he could put his feet up on the
opposite seat and smoke.  He glanced across at her, and
found, to his surprise, that she was contemplating him in
a manner difficult to describe&mdash;detached yet friendly;
certainly not in the way a lady ought to look at a man (even
if it is granted she might look at all) with whom she was
alone in a railway carriage in the year of our Lord 1893.
The Commander was quite startled; he looked away, but
his eyes strayed back, stealthily and shyly, as soon as he
was sure her gaze was averted.  No, she was not at all <i>that</i>
sort&mdash;no one could be with that placid, calm look, almost
like a nun's.  But she was a fine woman, for all that, with
her stylish sailor hat on the top of her head with a feather
at the back, and her smart costume with its leg-of-mutton
sleeves and her white collar, and the toe of one neat shoe
just showing beneath her skirt as she sat.  A fine upstanding
figure of a woman, in fact, trim-waisted and corseted
with correct severity.  As he looked, she turned and met his
gaze again, and he flushed with shy embarrassment down
his sunburnt neck and hurriedly looked out of the window.
But once again his eyes stole back again, inevitably.  And
she was smiling at him.
</p>

<p>
Agatha Brown's father was a Nonconformist green-grocer;
but, as his Nonconformist friends would hurriedly
explain when speaking of him, a greengrocer in a very large
line of business.  His big shop at Lewisham employed a
dozen assistants, and he had two other shops besides, at
Woolwich and Deptford, and the wealthy residents of the
big houses of Blackheath always came to him for such
delicacies as asparagus and early strawberries.  He even
handled a little wholesale trade, and long ago he had
climbed high enough to leave off living over his shop and to
take instead a substantial house beside Greenwich Park and
furnish it in the best manner of the 1880's.  Here he lived
with his three sons and his daughter (his eldest child) who
managed the house in the efficient and spacious manner
possible in that era.  His wife was dead and much regretted,
but, thanks to Agatha's domestic efficiency, not much
missed in the economic sphere.
</p>

<p>
That morning at breakfast Agatha had not felt any
premonition of what was going to be the most marvellous day
of her life.  She had risen at her usual hour of six-thirty, and
had helped one maid with the breakfast while the other
looked to the fires.  She had poured out tea for Will and
Harry and sat at table with them while they hurried
through breakfast, and had closed her eyes and clasped her
hands devoutly when Dad, having come back with George
in the trap from market, read prayers what time the other
two stood impatiently waiting to get off to their business of
managing the Woolwich and Deptford shops.  Then Dad,
too, ate his breakfast, and it was then that Agatha had the
first inkling that it was time something happened to her.
Dad of course read his newspaper, and of course being
preoccupied with that he could not attend properly to his table
manners.  With the newspaper propped up against the
marmalade jar he would bring his mouth down to his fork
rather than his fork up to his mouth, and he would open
the latter alarmingly (which was quite unpleasant when,
as was usual, he had not quite swallowed the preceding
mouthful) and thrust the fork home and snap down his big
moustache upon it in the way he always did, which Agatha
found on this particular morning to be positively distressing.
He drank his tea, too, noisily, through his moustache,
and although Agatha had listened to the performance
daily for twenty-nine years somehow she found it unusually
distasteful.  She found herself telling herself that it was time
she had a change, and realizing on the instant that although
she was that very day going for five days' stay with a bosom
friend at Ealing that amount of change would not suffice
her.  Her first reaction was to promise herself a dose of
senna that evening (senna was Agatha's prescription for all
the ills flesh is heir to) and her second, amazingly, was to
consider senna inadequate.  Only slightly introspective
though she was, Agatha found herself surprised at being
in such an odd frame of mind.
</p>

<p>
Then when Dad had taken his departure Agatha had
busied herself with the stupendous task of leaving everything
in the house prepared for her five days' absence.  She
went round and paid the tradesmen's books.  She instructed
the cook very positively as to all the menus to come; she
enjoined upon the housemaid the necessity to turn out the
drawing-room on Tuesday and the dining-room on
Wednesday, and Mr. Brown's bedroom and Mr. George's
bedroom on Thursday and Mr. Harry's bedroom and Mr. Will's
bedroom on Friday.  She did her share of the morning's
work; she lunched, as was her habit, excessively
lightly, and when the afternoon came round she made herself
ready for departure.  At four o'clock she left the house
with her little suitcase.  She felt lighthearted and carefree;
the tingle of her clean starched underlinen was pleasant to
her; she was free of the house and all its troubles for five
whole days; but all the same she did not want to spend five
days at the home of Adeline Burton at Ealing.  The old
great friendship between Agatha and Adeline had of course
cooled a little with the coming of maturity and with the
migration of the Burton family to Ealing, and the Burton
household was very like the Brown household, when all
was said and done.  But, still, Agatha felt strangely
light-hearted as she walked to the station; she hummed a little
song; and then she found herself in the same carriage as
Lieut.-Commander R. E. S. Saville-Samarez.
</p>

<p>
She liked him, at first sight, and at first sight she knew
him for what he was, a naval officer of the best brand of
British stupidity.  She liked his good clothes and his smooth
cheeks (Agatha, as she regarded these last, felt a revulsion
of feeling against the fashionable hairiness of 1893) and the
way he blushed when she caught him looking at her.  She
knew he would speak to her soon, and she knew she would
answer him.
</p>

<p>
Agatha's smile set the coping-stone on Samarez's
unsettledness.  He positively jumped in his seat.  Automatically
his hands fluttered to his pockets.
</p>

<p>
'Mind if I smoke?' he asked hoarsely;
</p>

<p>
'Not at all,' said Agatha.  'I should like it.'
</p>

<p>
That, of course, was at least four words more than any
lady ought to have said.  Samarez feverishly pulled out his
silver cigarette-case and matchbox, lit a cigarette with
fingers which were nearly trembling, and drew a lungful of
smoke deep into himself in an unthinking effort after
self-control.
</p>

<p>
Agatha was still smiling at him, the placid, innocent
smile one would expect to see on the face of a nun or a
mother.  Samarez simply had to go on talking to her, and
the Englishman's invariable opening topic came to his lips
like an inspiration.
</p>

<p>
'Beastly weather,' he said, with a nod through the
carriage window, where February sunshine fought a losing
battle against February gloom.
</p>

<p>
'I rather like it, somehow,' said Agatha.  She would have
liked any weather at the moment.  'Of course you find it
very different from the tropics,' she went on, to Samarez's
amazement.  How on earth could she tell he had been to the
tropics?
</p>

<p>
'Er&mdash;yes,' he said.  'Beastly hot there, sometimes.'
</p>

<p>
'China station?' she asked.  Agatha's knowledge of the
Navy was only what might be expected of a secluded young
woman of the middle class of 1893, but she had heard the
blessed words 'China Station' somewhere and they drifted
into her mind now and were seized upon gratefully.
</p>

<p>
'Yes,' said Samarez, more amused than ever, 'that was
my last commission.'
</p>

<p>
The China Station was a pleasant source of conversation.
Thanks to the exaltation of her mood, Agatha was able to
talk&mdash;or rather to induce Samarez to talk&mdash;without displaying
any annoying ignorance, and by the blessing of Providence
they chatted really amicably for a few minutes.
Samarez's heart warmed to this charming woman, so
refined, so friendly without being cheap, with such a musical
contralto voice and such a ready laugh.  Stations came and
stations went unheeded, and Samarez was quite surprised
when they peered out of the window and saw that they had
reached London Bridge&mdash;London Bridge on a dark, damp,
February evening.  With a little chill of disappointment he
realized that in a few minutes he would have to separate
from this friend.  He deemed himself fortunate even that she
was travelling on to Charing Cross.
</p>

<p>
Friends at the moment were scarce.  Samarez had a
week's leave on his hands, and he was almost at a loss as to
how to employ it.  He had had in mind dinner at the Junior
Rag, possibly an encounter with an acquaintance, and a
seat at a musical comedy afterwards.  But he had done that
for several evenings already, previous to his course at
Greenwich, and the prospect bored him, nearly unborable
as he was.  On the China Station, stifling under the awnings,
the most delectable spot on earth had appeared to be the
dining-room of the Junior Army and Navy Club, but now
it did not seem half so attractive.
</p>

<p>
And, above all, Agatha Brown was a woman, well
fleshed and desirable to the eye of 1893.  Women did not
count for much in Samarez's life; marriage, of course, was
unthinkable to a man of his sturdy devotion to the profession,
and his contact with other women had been slight and
nearly forgotten.  But&mdash;but the urge was there, unadmitted
but overwhelming.  Samarez at present had nothing more in
his mind than companionship.  He wanted to talk to a
woman&mdash;to this woman, now that he had made the first
impossible plunge.  He wanted neither men's talk nor
solitude.  He would have been scared by his intensity of
emotion had he had a moment in which to realize it&mdash;but
he had not.  They had rattled through Waterloo Junction,
and were rumbling on to Charing Cross railway bridge.
Through the window he could see the wide, grey river, and
the lights of Charing Cross Station were close at hand.
Agatha glanced up at her suitcase on the rack, in evident
mental preparation for departure.  Samarez stood up in the
swaying carriage; his hands flapped with embarrassment.
</p>

<p>
'L-look here,' he said, 'we don't want to say good-bye
yet.  Oh, we don't.  Let's&mdash;let's come and have dinner
somewhere.'
</p>

<p>
He stood holding to the luggage rack, appalled by his
realization that he had definitely committed himself, that
he was guilty (if the lady chose to find him so) of an
ungentlemanly action.  His innocent eyes pleaded for him.  And
Agatha's eyes softened; for he was so like an artless little
boy begging for more cake.  She felt motherly and not a bit
daring as she said yes.
</p>

<p>
Once out of the train Samarez, despite his stupefied
elation, displayed all the orderly logic of deed of the
disciplined man of action.  Agatha's suitcase and his own
leather kit-bag were ticketed-in at the cloakroom, a cab
was summoned, and with a flash of brilliance he recalled
the name of the one restaurant which in those bleak days
was suitable for ladies and at the same time was tolerant
of morning dress.  The cab-horse's hoofs clattered across
the station courtyard and out into the Strand, and they sat
side by side as the lamps went by.
</p>

<p>
Pleasant it was, and each was conscious of a comforting
warmth from the other.  Each felt supremely befriended
and most deliciously expectant&mdash;of what, they could not
say.  The drive passed all too quickly; to Agatha it hardly
seemed a moment before she found herself being helped
from the cab by the whiskered and uniformed restaurant
porter.
</p>

<p>
From opposite sides of the table each regarded the other,
seemingly with some slight misgiving regarding their good
fortune.  It was too good to be true, for the one that he
should be sitting with and talking dazzlingly to a woman of
good sense and irreproachable morals (to a sailor such an
encounter is all too rare an occurence), and for the other
that she should be in a restaurant at all (this was nearly
Agatha's first experience of restaurants) let alone with a
clean-bred, good-looking young man opposite her.  Samarez
ordered a good dinner&mdash;trust him for that&mdash;and summoned
the wine waiter.  The very mention of the word 'wine'
caused Agatha to start a little in her chair, for the worthy
Mr. Brown was a staunch, true-blue, even violent, abstainer,
who would not allow villainous alcohol even the shelter of
his roof.  But here of course, amid the gilding and the gay
people and the supple-backed waiters, it was all different.
</p>

<p>
'Choose for yourself,' said Agatha, as Samarez looked
across at her from the wine list.
</p>

<p>
Dinner passed by in a delicious dream.  Agatha's acquaintance
with food so far had been of the roast beef and apple-tart
order.  When she consulted Mrs. Beeton, it had been for
the purpose of designing substantial and unambitious meals
for the hearty Browns, who one and all, following in
Mr. Brown's footsteps, lost no opportunity of expressing their
contempt for what they termed 'made dishes.'  So far the
subtleties of sauces and the refinements of foods had passed
Agatha by, so that now each succeeding course lingering
brilliantly upon the palate came as a new and delicious
revelation.  Not even the necessity of tactfully observing
which implements Samarez employed and imitating his
example could mar her enjoyment, and the wine, with its
unaccustomed influence, warming and comforting and
heartening, was the finishing touch.  She leant forward
towards Samarez and talked without a care, and he talked
back with what seemed to him to be positively dazzling wit.
They made a good pair; Agatha with her smooth cheeks
and bright eyes and upright figure, Samarez bronzed and
blond and clean-looking, with the far-seeing expression in
his grey eyes which characterizes the majority of sailors.  He
was very young for his years; even though, as Agatha
realized with a pang of regret, he was actually younger than
she was.  And once or twice his head went back and he
chuckled deep down in his chest with wrinkles round his
eyes in a manner which brought a great big pain into
Agatha's breast, and made her long to stretch out her
barren arms and draw his rough head down to her bosom.
She found herself imagining herself rubbing her cheek
against his short rebellious hair, and the mere thought
turned her faint with longing as she sat in her chair,
strangely maternal.
</p>

<p>
'Well, I'm blest,' said the Commander suddenly.  'Do you
know, I've been talking to you all this time and I don't even
know what your name is?'
</p>

<p>
'It's Agatha,' said Agatha&mdash;that much of her name was
tolerable to her, although the 'Brown' always rankled&mdash;'and
I don't know yours either.'
</p>

<p>
Samarez hesitated for one regretted second; he was sure
that it was unwise to tell one's name to a strange woman,
but this woman was so different.
</p>

<p>
'It's a very long one,' he said, 'but it begins with Richard.'
</p>

<p>
'Of course it would,' said Agatha bewilderingly, 'and
they call you Dickie, don't they?'
</p>

<p>
'They used to,' admitted Samarez, 'but they mostly call
me Sammy nowadays, men do.'
</p>

<p>
'Then I shall call you Dickie,' said Agatha decidedly, and
she finished her coffee as though to seal the bargain.
</p>

<p>
So dinner was finished, and the room was beginning to
throng with more sensible people dining at a more reasonable
hour.  They had no possible excuse for lingering on,
and yet they both of them were most desperately unwilling
to part.  Their eyes met again and again across the table,
and conversation died a fevered death, and neither could
voice what each had most in mind.  Agatha simply did not
know the usual gambits leading up to the making of a new
appointment; Samarez with an odd touch of sensitiveness
felt that it would be banal and discordant to speak about
it&mdash;this was not an ordinary woman.  The restaurant was
growing crowded; the waiter brought his bill unasked, and
hovered round the table with the unmistakable intention of
showing them that the management would prefer to see
them make way for fresh comers.  Fate simply forced them,
with sinking hearts, to rise from the table with the words
unspoken.  Samarez waited for her in the foyer in a really
restless and unsettled state of mind.
</p>

<p>
And Agatha, adjusting her veil in the cloakroom, felt on
the verge of tears.  She had been mostly wildly unladylike;
she had talked with strange men in the gilded halls of vice;
it was past seven o'clock and she really must reach Ealing
and the Burtons' by nine at the latest; and she did not want
to leave Dickie.  Most emphatically she did not want to.  But
she had not the faintest idea of what she did want.
</p>

<p>
At the door circumstances forced them further towards
separation.
</p>

<p>
'Cab, I suppose?' said Samarez huskily.
</p>

<p>
They climbed into a four-wheeler, and Samarez, still
retaining a grain of sanity, directed the driver to Charing
Cross Station.  Agatha had clean forgotten the luggage left
there.  The cab wormed its way through the clattering traffic
and turned into Chandos Street, dim-lighted and quiet.
Restlessly Samarez took off his hat and wiped his fretted
forehead.  A passing street lamp showed up his boyish face
and his rumpled hair.
</p>

<p>
'Oh,' said Agatha uncontrollably.  One hand went to his
shoulder, the other fumbled for his lean brown hand in the
darkness.  Samarez turned clumsily with his arms out to her,
and all their unhappiness melted away under their wild
kisses.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter III</i>
</h3>

<p>
It was the lights of the Strand and of the courtyard
entrance at Charing Cross which brought them back
momentarily to reality.  Agatha's face was wet with tears,
her hat hung by one hatpin, as their embrace came to an
end.  The cab halted outside the station and a porter tore
open the door.
</p>

<p>
'I&mdash;I can't get out,' stammered Agatha, shrinking away
into a corner.
</p>

<p>
Samarez climbed out and shut the door.
</p>

<p>
'Wait!' he flung at the driver, and pelted into the station,
dragging out the luggage receipt from his pocket as he
hastened to the cloakroom with fantastic strides, blinded
by the lights.  By the grace of Providence there was no one
there awaiting attention; it was only a matter of seconds
before he came back, suitcase and kit-bag in hand.  He
opened the door of the cab, and Agatha came to life again
out of her mazed dream.
</p>

<p>
'Where to, sir?' asked the cab-driver.
</p>

<p>
'Where to?' echoed Samarez stupidly.
</p>

<p>
'I don't know&mdash;Ealing, I suppose,' said a little voice from
the depths of the cab.
</p>

<p>
'Ealing,' said Samarez to the cab-driver.
</p>

<p>
'Ealing, sir?  Ealing Broadway, sir?  Right, sir,' said
the cab-driver, and round came the horse and the door
slammed to, with Samarez and Agatha in blessed solitude
once more, happily ignorant of the meaning wink of the
cabdriver and the broad grins of the porters.  It was quite
several seconds before hand met hand and lip met lip again
in the velvet darkness of the cab, while the horse's hoofs
clip-clopped solidly onwards towards Ealing.
</p>

<p>
Passion had them greatly in thrall.  Agatha's hat was off
by now, and the tears flowed freely from her eyes as she
pressed against Samarez with all the abandon her corseted
waist permitted.  Agatha had forgotten she was twenty-nine,
of strict Wesleyan upbringing.  Twenty-nine years of
bottled-up emotion were tearing her to pieces; some faint,
unknown cause had obscurely begun the explosion&mdash;perhaps
even before she had met Samarez&mdash;and there was no
power on earth that could check it now before it had run
its course.  She gave herself up to him in an ecstasy of
giving.
</p>

<p>
As for Samarez there is less to be said.  He at least had
known kisses before, and the encirclement of a woman's
arms was not quite new to him.  Even purchased caresses
ought to have given him sufficient experience to have told
him whither they were straying, but reaction from loneliness
and the fierce insistent urge of his sex had swept him
away.  Agatha's sweet flesh in his arms and the touch of her
unpractised lips on his mouth were all the facts of which he
was conscious at the moment.  He never dreamed of
discretion while he let his instincts carry him away in the
darkness, and he pressed her hotly.
</p>

<p>
Somehow or other Agatha found herself speaking, her
hands on his breast and her face lifted to his.
</p>

<p>
'Of course, I've <i>got</i> to go to Ealing,' she said.  It was a
statement doomed to extinction at birth, made automatically
in an automatic hope of contradiction.
</p>

<p>
'What are you going to do there?' asked Samarez.
</p>

<p>
'I'm going to stay with friends.  They're expecting me.'
</p>

<p>
The little voice whispering in the darkness added fresh
fuel to the flames of Samarez's passion.  Into the back of
his mind leapt the sudden realization that in the cab with
them, beside them on the other seat lay her luggage and
his, all their necessaries for days.
</p>

<p>
'Can't you put them off?' he asked, hardly realizing what
he was saying.  'Send them a wire.  Don't go.'
</p>

<p>
'Oh, my <i>dear</i>,' came the answering whisper.
</p>

<p>
Let it not be imagined that Agatha acted in ignorance.  At
twenty-nine, when one is an old maid and busy with Chapel
work, one hears things.  Married women say things just as if
one were married oneself, and Chapel work sometimes
brings one into contact with illegitimate motherhood and
even sometimes undisguised adultery.  Agatha knew quite
well what happened when a man 'stayed with' a woman&mdash;at
least, she had a general idea of it even if she were hazy
as to detail.  So that her wordless consent to Samarez's
fierce suggestion, and her acquiescence when Samarez
leaned out of the window and redirected the cabman, were
absolutely inexcusable, so her fellow-workers would think.
But her fellow-workers had never known, perhaps would
never know, the careless, happy stupefaction of sudden
passion.
</p>

<p>
The hotel porter was discreet; the hotel reception clerk
was friendly; in fact, no one in the hotel thought twice
about them, because Agatha looked the last person in the
world to share a bedroom with a man who was not her
husband, and her glove concealed the absence of a
wedding-ring.  In the dignified seclusion of the hotel bedroom
Samarez's enforced calm fell away from him like a discarded
garment.  He opened his arms to her and she came
gladly to them, giving herself with a delicious, cool
relaxation.  She felt fantastically motherly towards this
tousle-headed boy even during his greediest caresses, and when he
sighed out his content with his face upon her bosom she
clasped him against it with the same gesture as she would
have used to a child.
</p>

<p>
And the next day, and the day after, and the day after
that this maternal attitude became more and more marked.
She was so many years older than he, she felt.  The sheer
physical longing she had felt for him had given way to a
stranger, calmer affection.  She seemed to have grown
suddenly used to him.  It was odd, but true.  No twinge of
conscience came to ruffle the serenity of her soul; she was
flooded with a sense of well-being that was not diminished
by the necessity for practical arrangements, such as writing
to Adeline Burton a careful letter explaining that an unforeseen
domestic crisis had compelled her reluctantly to postpone
her visit at such brief notice as to prevent her even
from letting her know.  Agatha would come some other
time, as soon as she could, if Adeline did not mind.  The
lies which Agatha wrote flowed so naturally from her pen
that she did not give them a thought&mdash;to Agatha's mind
the aged aunt suddenly stricken with mortal illness and
demanding immediate nursing seemed to be an actual living
character.  She did not even feel relieved that Greenwich
and Ealing should be so far apart as to render it quite
impossible for Adeline to discover by a casual call that no
such lady existed.
</p>

<p>
Samarez, on the other hand, was very puzzled and almost
uncomfortable of conscience on those occasions when it
occurred to him to think what he was doing, and to make
deductions from the somewhat meagre data presented to
him.  Agatha had never 'been there before'; he was sure of
that for more reasons than one.  No one could have been,
anyway, and still retained the blossoming innocence which
she displayed at every moment.  She clearly had not even
toyed with the idea of dallying with men.  Her underclothing
proved that, if nothing else did.  It was exquisitely neat, with
a myriad tucks and gatherings, but it was not to be called
frivolous.  It was even pathetic in its lack of sex appeal.  Just
the sort of white, longcloth underclothing a nun would
wear, if (Samarez had no information on the point) nuns
wore underclothing.  Samarez's knowledge of underclothing
was limited; but in those days it was only daughters of joy
who wore garments other than virgin white and strove after
ornament as well as utility.  And Agatha's pathetically
severe nightgown, high-buttoned and severe and undecorated,
settled that matter to Samarez's mind.  So that Agatha
was a respectable member of a respectable family, who had
bestowed her virginity on him just as she might have given
half a crown to a beggar.  It made Samarez queerly
uncomfortable.  And yet, after three days' intimacy, she was far
less attainable than ever before.  Samarez could feel no thrill
of pride of possession while he was with her, not even in
the most triumphant moments of intimacy.  Something was
still out of reach, beyond attainment, and he was piqued in
consequence.  He tried to buy presents for her, to lavish
money on her for clothes and jewellery, but whenever he
tried she put the suggestion aside with a smiling, irresistible
negative.  Poor Samarez was not to know that Agatha's
main reason for refusal was the impossibility of
subsequently explaining away these gifts to her family.
</p>

<p>
So it was with a queer mixture of pique and gentlemanly
feeling that, after three days, Samarez proposed marriage to
her.  He did not want to; he held the strongest possible
opinion regarding the unsuitability of marriage for naval
officers, and he did not believe in marriage much, anyway.
But he proposed, and as he did so he regarded her
anxiously with expectant eyes, at the same moment
annoyed with himself for throwing away his future and
comforted by the knowledge that he was doing the 'right
thing.'  And Agatha, her hands on his shoulders, looked
deep into those anxious eyes before she slowly shook her
head.
</p>

<p>
'No, Dickie,' she said, 'it would be better if we didn't.  But
it was awfully nice of you to ask me.'
</p>

<p>
Then she strained him impulsively to her, and kissed him
hotly.  She saw the unwisdom of marrying a man whom
one only loved as one might love a pet St. Bernard, and who
would never be able to claim that entire devotion and
subservience which Agatha, in accordance with the ideas of
the time, thought she ought to give to her husband.  But she
was keenly alive to the extent of the sacrifice Samarez had
proposed making, and appreciative of it.
</p>

<p>
So that after five days the affair came to an end.  Five
days during which Agatha had had a glimpse of the sort of
life led by women who are not greengrocers' daughters;
five days of theatres (an annual pantomime and an annual
circus was the nearest Agatha had ever come to a theatre
until then), of good food, of leisure, of ample spendings.
Truth to tell, the waste of money and time, by the end of
the five days, had so worked upon Agatha's mind that she
was quite glad of the prospect of returning home to
economical housekeeping and domestic industry.  And
Samarez had begun to cease to interest her&mdash;he was not a
tremendously interesting fellow, as a matter of fact.
</p>

<p>
Yet the parting was painful.  Samarez did not want her to
go; he clung to her as they kissed good-bye in the hotel
bedroom, with his hand to her breast.  He felt almost
humble and subdued, almost frightened at the prospect of
two days' loneliness before rejoining his ship; and Agatha's
eyes were wet, too, although she realized she was doing the
sensible thing, and it was very gently that she put his hands
aside and turned away.  He held her hand in the cab as they
drove to Charing Cross, and he even tried to make one
last appeal after she had boarded the train for Greenwich.
She only shook her head and smiled, however, and two
minutes later Samarez was alone on the platform, watching
the train round the bend in the distance, trying obstinately
not to feel relieved.
</p>

<p>
It was the end of the incident for him.  In later years he
forgot what his own attitude had been, and he only
remembered it as a rather pleasant and unusual encounter,
which he would like to repeat with someone else (he never
did).  Sometimes, years later, in expansive moments, he
would tell other men of his strange meeting with 'quite a
nice, well-brought-up woman, a lady, you know, with
whom he had stayed five delightful days at Benjamin's
Hotel, who had refused all his presents except the wedding-ring
they had found it advisable to buy, and whose surname
and address he had never known.'  The other men would
be incredulous and envious, and Samarez, Commander
Samarez or Captain Samarez or Admiral Samarez, as he
came to be, would pull down his waistcoat and plume
himself upon his unusual good fortune and dexterity.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter IV</i>
</h3>

<p>
Agatha arrived home to find everything quite normal, save
for the inevitable deterioration of efficiency consequent
upon the mistress's absence.  No hint had reached the
Browns that she had not been staying with the Burtons,
and she told one or two placid lies regarding these latter,
which gave a little local colour to the idea that she had been
there; and, as lying was unusual to her, she almost came to
believe she had been there.  For her exalted mood died
away.  Within a week it seemed incredible to her that she
could have been guilty of such terrible conduct; she had
forgotten the state of mind which had led her into it; she
felt and hoped that it had only been a very vivid and
shocking dream.  She ceased in consequence to carry the ring
Samarez had bought her on the ribbon round her neck.
</p>

<p>
Yet very soon she became actively aware that it was not a
dream, could not have been a dream.  For a time she thrust
her fears behind her and went on grimly with her household
affairs, but they continually recurred to her.  She was
worried about them, and uncertain of what she ought to do.
She knew Samarez's name and ship (of course she would!)
and for a moment thought of writing to him, but she put the
idea aside as unworthy.  But as the symptoms became
unmistakable and she began to fear discovery she grew more
worried, and it was a positive relief when the storm broke.
Mr. Brown came home one day at five&mdash;rather earlier than
his usual time.
</p>

<p>
'No, I don't want any tea,' he said, and there was that in
his voice which told Agatha what he knew.
</p>

<p>
'Come here, my girl,' went on Mr. Brown, 'I want to talk
to you.'
</p>

<p>
'Well?' said Agatha, quite calm and steady now that the
crisis had come.
</p>

<p>
'I met Burton this afternoon, quite by accident.  And he
said&mdash;he said he was sorry to hear about my sister, and
what a pity it was you weren't able to go over to Ealing and
stay there the last time it was arranged.'
</p>

<p>
Mr. Brown stared at his daughter from under his heavy
eyebrows.  The thing was incredible to him&mdash;and yet&mdash;and
yet&mdash;his doubts led him to work himself up into a rage.
</p>

<p>
'Didn't you tell me last February you were going to stay
there, and didn't you come back and say you had?' he
blared.
</p>

<p>
'Yes,' said Agatha.
</p>

<p>
'Well, where did you get to?  Where the <i>devil</i> did you get to?'
</p>

<p>
Agatha made no reply.
</p>

<p>
'You made me look such a bleedin' fool when Burton said
that to me,' raved Mr. Brown&mdash;the adjective showed he was
nearly beside himself.  'Where the devil did you get to?'
</p>

<p>
The horrible and incredible doubts which had assailed
him and which he had put aside as quite impossible
renewed themselves and goaded him into frightful agitation.
</p>

<p>
'Was&mdash;was it a <i>man</i>?' he demanded.  'Tell me this minute,
girl.'
</p>

<p>
Agatha knew that it was no use telling Mr. Brown about
Samarez.  He wouldn't understand.  She didn't understand
herself.
</p>

<p>
'My God, it was!' said Mr. Brown.  'Who was it?  What
filthy swine&mdash;&mdash;?'
</p>

<p>
He mouthed and spluttered his rage.
</p>

<p>
'Who was it?  Was it young Evans?'
</p>

<p>
Evans was the local roué, a greasy-haired young man
whom Agatha hated.  The suggestion was so comic that
Agatha had to smile, and the smile increased her father's
frenzy.
</p>

<p>
'Who was it?  Tell me, or I'll&mdash;&mdash;'
</p>

<p>
'It wasn't anybody you know, Dad,' said Agatha.
</p>

<p>
'Damned if I care.  Tell me his name and I'll find him.  I'll
teach him.'
</p>

<p>
'No you won't, Dad, I won't tell you.'
</p>

<p>
'You won't?  We'll see, my girl.'
</p>

<p>
'Yes, we'll see,' said Agatha.  Her old exalted mood was
coming over her again, leaving her outwardly calm and
placid and nunlike, but inwardly rejoicing.  Mr. Brown
stared at her serene face, and his rage simmered down into
incredulous astonishment.
</p>

<p>
'Who the devil was it, if it wasn't Evans?' he pleaded
pitifully.
</p>

<p>
'It was someone else,' said Agatha quite calmly, looking
over his head at something a thousand miles distant.
</p>

<p>
'But&mdash;but he didn't do you any <i>harm</i>, Aggie, old girl, did
he?' wheedled Mr. Brown.
</p>

<p>
Agatha met his eyes, and nodded with certitude.
</p>

<p>
'You would say he did, Dad,' said Agatha.
</p>

<p>
The flush of Mr. Brown's anger gave way to a yellow
pallor.  His very bulk as he sat in his sacred chair seemed to
diminish.
</p>

<p>
'You don't mean that, do you, dear?' he asked quite
unnecessarily, for he knew she did.
</p>

<p>
Later he gave way to pathetic helplessness.
</p>

<p>
'What am I to do?' he pleaded.  'Whatever will the
Chapel say?'
</p>

<p>
Upon Mr. Brown dawned the awful realization that
despite his three shops, despite his wholesale connection,
despite his fine house and solid furniture, the Chapel would
find huge stores of food for gossip in this terrible
catastrophe.  The finger of scorn would be pointed at him; he
would never be able to hold up his head again.  Never more
would the proud privilege be his of passing round the plate
at morning service.
</p>

<p>
The arrival of his two eldest sons prolonged the
discussion.  Will and Harry were brimful of the ferocious
energy which had carried their father to such heights in the
world of greengrocery, and, unlike him, they were still
young and able to reach instant, Napoleonic decisions.
</p>

<p>
'People mustn't know about it,' said Will positively,
'that's certain.  Agatha will have to go away for the&mdash;as
soon as it's necessary.  We'll have to say she's gone to stay
with friends in Edinburgh or somewhere.'
</p>

<p>
'That's it,' chimed in Harry, 'and the&mdash;the child will have
to be boarded out when she comes back.  It ought to be
easy enough.'
</p>

<p>
The three of them looked to Agatha for agreement, and
found none.  Her face was as though cut in stone.  The bare
thought of having her child 'boarded out,' the child for
whom she was ready, even anxious, to endure so much, was
like a savage blow in the face.
</p>

<p>
'No,' she said, 'I won't have him boarded out.  I'm going
to be with him, always.'
</p>

<p>
The pronoun she used displayed her silly, baseless hope
that her child would be a son, but it passed unnoticed and
uncommented upon.
</p>

<p>
'Don't be silly,' said Harry, with immense scorn.  'Of
course we must board the child out&mdash;if it lives.'
</p>

<p>
The thought and the wish that fathered it tore at Agatha's
heart-strings.
</p>

<p>
'Oh, how I hate you!' she burst out.  'Of course he's
going to live.  And I'm going to keep him too.  Don't you
dare say anything else!'
</p>

<p>
'Pooh!' sneered Will.  'You'll have to do what you're
told.  Beggars can't be&mdash;&mdash;'
</p>

<p>
Will's speech broke off short as he caught sight of a flash
of triumph in Agatha's face, and was reminded by it of a
forgotten factor in the argument.  He met the eyes of his
father and his brother with some uneasiness.
</p>

<p>
For fifteen years ago, when Mr. Brown had just begun
to be successful in business, he had followed the prudent
example of thousands of others by investing his savings in
house property and deeding it over to his wife.  That, of
course, had been in the days before limited liability, and
was a wise precaution ensuring the possession of capital
and the necessaries of life even if bankruptcy were to strip
Mr. Brown nominally of all he possessed.  Mr. Brown had
seen to it that his wife made a will in his favour, and had
thought no more about it.  Until his wife's death for
then, as soon as Mrs. Brown was in her grave, a wretched
pettifogging lawyer from the purlieus of Deptford, had
produced a will of recent date (made, in fact, as soon as
Mrs. Brown was aware that she was suffering from the cancer
which caused her death) by which all her property, real and
personal, was left to her daughter Agatha.  It had been
Mrs. Brown's one exceptional action in life (corresponding to
that one of Agatha's whose results they were just discussing)
and had been undoubtedly inspired by the desire to
render Agatha free of that dependence upon mankind
which even Victorian ladies found so exasperating on
occasions.  Dad and the boys, as soon as they had recovered
from their astonishment, had tried to laugh the matter off.
Dad had gone on collecting the weekly rents of the six
houses in Beaconsfield Terrace as usual, and as usual had
devoted them to his own purposes without rendering
account.  But those houses were Agatha's all the same, as
was the hundred pounds a year clear which they brought in.
Will and Harry and Mr. Brown looked at each other with
an uneasy suspicion of defeat.
</p>

<p>
'I'm not a beggar,' said Agatha, 'so I can be a chooser if I
like.  And I'm going to choose.  I'm going to live with my
boy wherever I like.  So there!'
</p>

<p>
Will did not know when he was beaten, and he tried to
continue the argument.
</p>

<p>
'Don't be a fool, Aggie,' he said, 'you can't do that.  You
can't manage property and&mdash;and&mdash;have a baby and all that
sort of thing.  You'll be cheated right and left and you'll
come whining back to us for help before the year's out.  And
then&mdash;&mdash;'
</p>

<p>
His tone and expression made it unpleasantly clear what
would happen then.  Agatha only shrugged her shoulders
and turned away; she sniffed with contempt as if she had
been fourteen instead of twenty-nine and a budding mother.
And that sniff completed Will's exasperation.  He boiled
over with rage at being thus contemptuously treated by a
mere woman&mdash;and especially at the thought of all that
goodly money being taken out of the family.
</p>

<p>
'Come here!' he said, and sprang across and seized her
wrist.
</p>

<p>
For a second or two the brother and sister stood and
glared at each other.  But Agatha rallied all her waning
moral strength, and continued her amazing rebellion
against the godlike male.
</p>

<p>
'Let me go!' she said.
</p>

<p>
She tore herself free, and shrank aside from his renewed
attempt to grab hold of her.  She evaded his grip, and
forgetful of all decorum she brought her hand round in a full
swing so that it landed with an echoing slap upon Will's
pudgy cheek.  He staggered back with his ear singing and
his heart appalled at this frightful rebellion.  Then Agatha
turned away and walked slowly from the room, and slowly
upstairs to her bedroom, where, with calm, unthinking
deliberation she packed the suitcase which had accompanied
her on that wonderful trip to London nearly three
months before.  She included her jewel case with her few
petty pieces of jewellery; then, struck by a sudden thought,
she opened it again, took out the wedding ring Samarez had
bought her, and slipped it on to the third finger of her left
hand.  Then, suitcase in hand, she descended the stairs and
walked slowly to the front door.  The dining-room stood
half open as she passed it, and her glance within showed
her Dad huddled spiritlessly in his armchair, and Will and
Harry collapsed and despondent in two chairs by the table.
Perhaps if George, her favourite brother, had been there
too, Agatha might even then have stayed her steps.  But he
had not yet returned from work, and the others hardly
looked up as she went by.  She opened the door and walked
out down the pretentious, tiny carriage drive to the road,
and turned to the left towards the station.  Somehow as she
walked thither panic came over her and she hastened her
steps more and more until she was almost running.  When
she reached the station and found there was no up train for
half an hour she could not bring herself to wait; instead she
boarded the down train and travelled on it for a couple
of stations, and then changed trains and returned back
through Greenwich.  And so Harry and George, sent out to
make peace at any price by a despairing Dad ten minutes
after she had left the house, quite missed her.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter V</i>
</h3>

<p>
So that at midsummer, 1893, a pleasant-faced widow,
Mrs. Agatha Brown, attired in all the hideous panoply of
mourning for a newly-dead husband which the Queen's
example had made nearly compulsory, came to live in
lodgings at Peckham.  Her sympathetic landlady soon knew
all about her&mdash;about the husband, rather a bad lot,
seemingly, who had been in the greengrocery trade and had
died suddenly of some rather vague disease, but leaving his
widow well provided for by the standards of that simple
place and time; about the happy event which was to be
expected shortly; about her general friendlessness and the
dislike with which her late husband's family regarded her
for intercepting the legacies they had come to look upon as
their due.  Mrs. Rodgers became a great admirer of
Mrs. Brown.  Mrs. Brown was so evidently a lady, yet withal she
had so sound a knowledge of practical affairs, and, most
important, she had round her that tremendous aura of
'independent means' which implies so much to a working-class
dependent for its daily bread upon the whim of an
employer.  Mrs. Brown paid splendidly regular money for
her furnished rooms, but she paid only a tiny amount more
than the lowest market value, so that contempt could not
creep in to adulterate Mrs. Rodgers's admiration.
Mrs. Brown knew all about the prices of things and how long
they ought to last, and she always knew how much of her
little joints and of her butter and tea and other supplies she
had left, so that Mrs. Rodgers's first tentative stealings were
calmly checked, and she bore no ill will&mdash;quite the
contrary.  She was soon a very subservient ally.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Deane, too, who had drawn up that astonishing will
of Agatha's mother which had enabled Agatha to become
Mrs. Brown of Peckham, was very helpful and kind.  He
shook his head sympathetically when Agatha, calling upon
him, told him about family trouble which had led her to
leave home, and of course, seeing that such was his
business, he readily consented to take upon himself the
management of Agatha's 'estate'&mdash;the six houses of
Beaconsfield Terrace.  He looked up curiously and sharply
when Agatha explained that at her new address she was
known as Mrs. Brown, and when he noticed the expression
on her face he pulled his white whiskers and looked down
at his notes again in embarrassed fashion.  After all, he
was a solicitor, and solicitors should not be shocked at
encountering family skeletons.
</p>

<p>
Colchester Street, Peckham, was a brief road of a hundred
houses a side, nearly similar but not quite, the pavements
grimly flagged, the rest grimly macadamized.  At one
end was the main road, along which poured a volume of
traffic considered large for those times&mdash;horse trams and
horse buses predominating&mdash;and at the other end was a
public house, the 'Colchester Arms'; but despite this latter
handicap Colchester Street was very respectable and at that
time very few of the houses accommodated more than one
family.  Just here and there widows or widowers or
maiden-ladies (school teachers) occupied one or two rooms, but
that was a very different matter from other possible
developments.  Agatha had drifted to 37 Colchester Street
as a result of a brief examination of the small advertisements
of the local paper; it was the first address she had
called at, and she was satisfied.  She settled in, and settled
down, to a life which was an odd blend of the strictly
orderly and logical and nightmarishly fantastic.  It was
quite orderly and logical of course that she should pay her
weekly bills promptly and keep a close eye on her expenditure
and exact respect from those whom she encountered,
but it was wildly fantastic that she should have no exacting
daily duties, that time should hang idly on her hands, that
she should have no calls to make nor callers to receive, that
she should be addressed as 'Mrs.,' that she should go to the
local doctor and surrender her sweet private body to him
for examination and decision on her condition.
</p>

<p>
The doctor's verdict, of course, was only in agreement
with her own.  He, too, looked at her sharply; he knew her
for a widow and a newcomer, and he guessed shrewdly
that there was more in her history than she was likely to
tell him, although&mdash;although&mdash;her sedate costume and
sedate, assured manner and placid purity of expression
made him doubt his doubts, only to have them return in
renewed strength when he found that she was friendly with
no woman&mdash;that, seemingly, she was without a friend in the
world.  But he did all his duty and more; he prescribed a
regimen for her, gave her information on points of which
she was quite ignorant, and finally obtained for her two or
three books, written in the genteel round-the-corner style
in which such books were then written, which more or less
gave her guidance towards the approaching great event.
</p>

<p>
In the 'nineties expectant mothers were real invalids; they
must not do this and they must not do that, and it were
better if they did not do the other; the books hedged in
Agatha with all sorts of restrictions and prescriptions, and
they took it for granted that she would be really unwell,
whereas, if the truth must be told, she never felt better in
her life.  At times she was puzzled about it, but she took the
written word for Gospel&mdash;that and the manifold hints and
suggestions of Mrs. Rodgers&mdash;because, after all, she knew
no more about it than what they told her.  So now she rose
late, only when the children were passing whistling to each
other under her bedroom window on their way to school,
and she breakfasted in her dressing-gown, and she sat by a
closed window (with a fire until summer was indubitably
come) and watched the petty pageant of the streets while
she stitched and stitched and dreamed in all the unreality
of occupied idleness.
</p>

<p>
For, although the books assumed her to be an invalid,
they offered some compensation at least in the array
of garments they prescribed as necessary for the 'little
stranger'&mdash;that horrible expression of which they made
such free use.  It was not a horrible expression to Agatha;
she would have called it a genteel necessary circumlocution
if it had ever occurred to her to employ such an exotic
phrase.  The 'little stranger,' then, had to have a myriad
garments&mdash;binders yards and yards long, matinee jackets,
veils and shawls and christening gowns, socks and gloves,
daygowns and nightgowns of flannel exquisitely
embroidered in silk&mdash;and Agatha made every blessed thing
herself, stitching away patiently by the window.  She
stitched and stitched, but of the dreams she wove in with
the silk it would not be right to tell.
</p>

<p>
She came to know that side street and its habitués so
well.  There were rag-and-bone men, each chanting his call
in his own particular manner; there were the milkmen on
the eleven o'clock round, and the smart baker's cart, and
the butcher's dog-cart drawn by a showy chestnut sadly
overdriven by the butcher's greasy-haired son; there was
the insurance agent, frock-coated and bowler-hatted, and
the fruit-sellers and knife-grinders.  On three afternoons a
week organ grinders came, one of them with a shivering
monkey in a red coat, and another, who was a real Italian,
bronzed and handsome with marvellously white teeth, who
sang 'O Sole Mio' so sentimentally that Agatha always
opened the window and threw him a penny.  And besides
all these there were the children&mdash;oh, the children!  Every
house had its two and three, who came trotting home to
dinner at twelve and back again to school at two, and down the
street once more at half-past four.  Agatha knew them all,
the big ones and the little ones, the late ones and the early
ones, the good ones and the naughty ones.  Big sisters often
had one or two to escort, and more than once during those
six months Agatha watched the rise of a new independence
when some baby boy would suddenly decide that big sisters
were no longer of use to him and would find his own way to
school, not quite sure of himself either, with an occasional
look round to see that the sister was not unattainably out of
reach.  Agatha could not have watched with greater interest
the beginning of a new planet.
</p>

<p>
Some there were to whom the grim flagstones of the
pavement were friendly and sociable, for it was a great game
to walk to school entirely on the lines between them; and
just outside No. 37 there were three successive very wide
flagstones, much wider than the ordinary six-year-old could
stride, and Agatha would find herself leaning forward in
great excitement to see whether this little boy or that little
girl would accomplish the perilous passage in safety.  There
were naughty little boys who played 'knocking down
ginger'&mdash;knocking at nearly every door in the street and running
away before they opened.  Agatha's heart used to beat quite
fast in case they were caught, but they never were.  Tops
were all the rage when Agatha first came to No. 37, and
they were succeeded by marbles and skipping ropes
(according to sex), and cherry stones and little balls and one
or two cricket bats made their appearance before football
came into its own again.  There was one dreadful incident
when a prized tennis ball rolled down a drain, and Agatha
watched palpitating while the grating was prised up and two
small urchins of seven hung on to the legs of another small
urchin of nine while he lowered three-quarters of himself
head downwards down the hole and reached the ball by a
convulsive stretching which threatened every moment to
precipitate him upside down into the horrible hole.
</p>

<p>
It was the little boys in whom Agatha took most interest,
although the little girls claimed a good share.  She knew the
tidy ones and the untidy ones, and the prim ones and the
tomboyish ones, and, with typical partiality, she liked the
tidy ones best.  Her heart was really wrung with agony when
a disaster occurred to the primmest and tidiest of them
all, when that self-satisfied, smug ten-year-old found her
drawers slipping down there in the road with a whole lot of
people about.  It was into the front garden of No. 37 that
she retired, and Agatha, with yearning sympathy, watched
her putting matters right while cowering behind the stunted
privet bushes.
</p>

<p>
Strange that children should thus hold her fascinated.
Agatha had never before thought about children; she had
been too preoccupied with two maids and a house to look
after, and the little she had known about the method of
arrival selected by children had displeased her.  She had felt
a sort of contempt for the shapeless, helpless wives upon
whom she had sometimes called&mdash;Mr. Brown's fellow-Nonconformists
were prolific fathers&mdash;and she despised wailing
babies, and wet babies, and sick babies.  All the babies she
knew fell into one of these three categories, and children
were always quarrelsome, or stupid, or self-assertive.  It was
all different now; Agatha, stitching a thousand tucks into
one ridiculous nightgown, or implanting wonderful
embroidery into the corners of a flannel daygown, thought of
few things besides children.  But then of course she was a
prisoner for the time, and prisoners, by common report,
take interest in spiders and mice and things like that, just
as Agatha did.
</p>

<p>
There was another matter in which she took an interest,
though.  One day while casually glancing through the
newspaper a name caught her eye, and with a slight sense of
shock she looked again.  The name was that of Lieutenant-Commander
R. E. S. Saville-Samarez, and it occurred half-way
down a list headed 'Naval Appointments.'  Agatha may
perhaps have seen that column before, but it had conveyed
nothing to her.  She had not realized before that by its aid
she would be able to follow Samarez's professional career,
and the discovery stimulated her attention.  She found there
was another column which sometimes appeared, headed
'Movements of H.M. Ships,' and with the aid of these two
she could trace Samarez hither and thither wherever the
Lords of Admiralty might send him.  After that Agatha
always bought her own newspaper instead of depending on
casual readings of Mrs. Rodger's, and it was for these
items that she always looked first.  It became her hobby, just
as children had become her main interest.
</p>

<p>
Day passed after day, and week after week.  The chair by
the first-floor front window had become a second nature to
her, just as had her evening walks by side streets.  It had
almost begun to seem as if she had done nothing else all
her life than await the arrival of the son she so confidently
expected, and as if she would do nothing else.  It called for
quite an effort to make herself realize that her time was at
hand.  Doctor Walters of course treated the affair in a far
more matter-of-fact manner, and it was the businesslike
solemnity of his visits which did most to impress Agatha
with the need to complete her arrangements.
</p>

<p>
Within the last few weeks a new portent had appeared in
Salisbury Road, next to Colchester Road.  A board had
spread itself with wide-open welcoming arms there, bearing
the legend 'Nursing Home&mdash;Surgical, General, Maternity.'  Until
that era nursing homes in the suburbs had been
almost non-existent.  Suburban people, if they were ill, went
into hospitals; if they were only not quite so ill they
struggled back to life or on to death in their own rabbit hutches
of houses; nine hundred and ninety-nine suburban babies
out of a thousand were born in the suburban beds which
had seen their engendering.  The average wife would never
have dreamed of going cold-bloodedly elsewhere for her
confinement, especially when domestic servants were still
common.  Suburban nursing homes and restaurants and all
the other insidious wreckers of home life were only to
burgeon into full blossom with the lack of domestic
servants.  The Salisbury Nursing Home was a little before its
time; its 'Surgical' and 'General' departments were merely
heroic gestures, and even its 'Maternity' side never flourished.
The venture came to a disastrous end after a year's struggle,
but that year saw the arrival of Agatha's child.
</p>

<p>
Agatha made her arrangements with Doctor Walters's
full approval, for the doctor, with lingering happy memories
of hospital experience and trained assistance and proper
appliances, was thoroughly dissatisfied with the makeshifts
he usually had to employ in practice, with curtained rooms
and feather beds and all the other hideously unhygienic
arrangements with which mothers could find no fault.  So it
was with a strange excited feeling that one day Agatha
walked round to the Salisbury Nursing Home with Mrs. Rodgers
at her side, carrying the historic suitcase, the suitcase
which was accompanying her for the third successive
occasion on a great adventure.  Agatha liked it all; she liked
the bare, clean rooms and the trim, efficient nurses and the
cheerfully unsympathetic aspect of the place; for Agatha
was of a Spartan turn of mind mostly.
</p>

<p>
She looked on pain as a necessary part of life; she had
been imbued since childhood with notions about 'the curse
of Eve' and similar predestinate ideas; she knew (and it
tortured her) that she had 'sinned,' and she went unshrinkingly
forward.  The grit that had carried her father from
errand running to wholesaling took her into maternity
without a tremor or a regret.  The slight pains came, and she
was packed away into bed; Doctor Walters called, was
unhesitatingly cheerful, and went away again.  And then the
real pains came, wave after wave of them, so that she found
herself flung into a sea of pain of an intensity she had not
believed possible.  The smooth, efficient face of the nurse,
and Doctor Walters's, with its kindly detachment, floated
into her consciousness and out again through a grey mist.
She caught a whiff of ether, but at the time she had no idea
that it was being used on her.  Then it was all over (Agatha,
looking back, would have said that it had only taken half
an hour or so) and she was free to hold her child on her
arm for a few wonderful minutes.  The delights of motherhood
were very obvious and none the less pleasant.  It was
a boy of course.  Agatha had been quite certain of it from
the first.  Nothing else could have been possible.  Agatha to
her dying day never realized that it was only a successful
even chance, and not a fixed, settled certainty.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter VI</i>
</h3>

<p>
She called him Albert; goodness knows why.  She would
not have 'Dick,' which one might have thought her natural
choice.  Somewhere within her she realized that Richard
Saville-Samarez did not possess quite as much brains as she
would like her child to have, and she would take no
chances.  She had hesitated over 'George,' but had put it
aside in case she ever encountered her family again, for
'George' was her father's name as well as her favourite
brother's, and she would not have them think that the child
was called after them; for it might give them a feeling of
proprietary interest, and she did not want that; Albert was
all her own.  So she chose 'Albert.'  She knew personally no
one of that name at all, which satisfied her jealous desire
for possession, while about the name there clung a flavour
of association with the Royal Family which endeared it to
her rather bourgeois little heart.
</p>

<p>
And Albert Brown grew up and developed just as other
babies did, although Agatha would have indignantly denied
any similarity.  He took his food manfully.  He played with
his toys at first with feeble, fumbling fingers of helpless
babyhood, and later with the more purposeful action of
growing muscle sense.  He cut his teeth and fretted over
them just as much as one would expect of a healthy child
of healthy parents.  He achieved his first sitting up and
his first straggling attempt to kick.  Once or twice he
allowed his digestion to become upset.  Soon he achieved
the miracle of an erect attitude, and eventually came the
glorious day when he first addressed Agatha as 'Mummy,'
and not long after Mrs. Rodgers developed into Miss Ozzes.
</p>

<p>
For Agatha had returned to No. 37 Colchester Road
from the Salisbury Nursing Home.  It was comfortable and
she did not want to seek out a new resting-place, and
Mrs. Rodgers had found no new satisfactory tenant, and&mdash;those
six months of approaching motherhood had endeared even
that unromantic, unambitious little street to Agatha.
Moreover, Agatha soon began to establish a business connection
in the locality.  Albert's marvellous garments were the
admiration of all who saw them, and the tale of them was
told round about.  It was not long before Agatha received
tentative inquiries as to whether she would mind making
similar things for other Peckham babies, newly arrived or
expected shortly.  Agatha had found that even the labour of
looking after the finest baby in England left her with much
free time, and idleness was abhorrent to her.  She accepted
commissions eagerly, and it was not long before she found
that she had little spare time left; those firm decisive fingers
of hers were busy most of the day (when they were not
occupied by Albert Brown) stitching away at marvellous
embroidery on pelisses and christening robes and, by
a natural extension, on wedding dresses and trousseau
underclothing.  There was not much profit to be made, but
still there was a little, and Agatha, although she had found
that it was easy enough to live on a hundred pounds a year,
was eager to increase her income and accumulate savings.
Mr. Deane, the solicitor, had looked at her incredulously
when she had told him it was her intention to make Albert
an officer in the Navy; he had even hinted as tactfully as he
might that perhaps admission to the <i>Britannia</i> might not
easily be obtained for the illegitimate son of a greengrocer's
daughter, and he had declaimed in his soft-spoken way at
the expense as a waste of money, but Agatha cherished the
ambition none the less.  If foresight and money and good
training could gain the King's commission for Albert, she
was going to leave no stone unturned to provide that
foresight and money and good training.  Agatha set her round
chin firmer still and bent to her sewing with renewed
forcefulness.
</p>

<p>
So Albert Brown grew up in a world of many sections.
Upstairs there was his mother, who spoke to him softly and
clearly, and whom he knew by continual experience it was
best to obey promptly.  On the other hand, he knew that if
he could manage the perilous descent of the stairs there
would be a warm welcome for him from Mrs. Rogers, who
was always ready with a word, or a piece of bread and
butter covered with brown sugar, or an unimaginative
although ready part in whatever game he chose to devise,
or some other equally welcome contribution to his routine.
Yet Mrs. Rodgers, with all her honeyed or brown-sugared
endearments, did not bulk one half as large in Albert's
imagination, and most certainly not in his affection, as did
his mother, who played games really well, and who read
entrancing books to him, and whose voice, with its
sweetness and purity of intonation, was worth a thousand times
as much as Mrs. Rodgers's hoarse utterance.  Outside the
house there was the Street with its myriad mighty
attractions&mdash;the carts with their big straining horses, mightily
feathered about the fetlocks, hugely hoofed and grandly
quartered, hides glistening and nosebags tossing; and
errand boys and sweeps and buses and road-mending
gangs, and toyshop windows and little boys and girls; and
beyond the Street was the Park, where little boys with a
high internal pressure of energy could run madly up and
down and hoot and screech and scream and look at the
boats on the pond and make friends with stray dogs and
gallop back to where Mother was sitting and gallop away
again at a gait alternating between that consonant with a
horseman in a hurry and a locomotive with its whistle in
full blast.  The Park and the Street and Upstairs and
Downstairs were all exceedingly splendid places most times, and
if the earthrending unhappiness of childhood ever got a
grip on you then there was always Mother's sweet-scented
breast on which to pour out your woes, and Mother's soft,
round arms to go round you, and her nice hands to pat you
on the back until your sorrows were inconsequently
forgotten.  Soon the world had a fifth quarter, which was
School, presided over by an omnipotent deity called Miss
Farrow, who knew everything, and who was so supremely
great that you never realized her smiles might be intended
for you, and who on terrible occasions wielded the cane
with dreadful results upon such small boys as dared to be
naughty.  That cane was much more to be feared than any
possible smacking Mummy might give.
</p>

<p>
In fact, Agatha, watching the development of her child
with all the terrible detachment of a mother born to be
gushingly affectionate and restrained by a hot ambition,
came early to the conclusion that her son was not a genius,
not greatly above the average brains, and much more
amenable to discipline than ever she could picture Nelson
or Drake to be in their childhood.  He was an orderly and
law-abiding sprig of modern civilization; school rules and
home rules meant something to him unless the temptation
to break them was of an unusually compelling nature.
Agatha felt a little twinge of disappointment; surely a child
so lawlessly conceived ought to be vastly different from
the ordinary herd!  But those plans, so often revised and
lovingly re-revised during the six months at Colchester
Road before Albert's arrival, were easily capable of covering
even this state of affairs.  The calm foresight of a woman
with only herself and her child to consider began to plan a
new system of training aimed at carrying young Albert's
footsteps with security along the thorny road of Admiralty.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps if Albert's father had been a stockbroker
Agatha's thoughts would have been directed towards stocks
and shares.  If he had been an artist Agatha would have
begun to study art; as it was the fact that he was an officer
in the Royal Navy gave her the first necessary impetus
towards adopting the Navy as her hobby.  The beginnings
were small of course&mdash;it is not often that we are so fortunate
as to be able to trace eventual vast enterprises from
their earliest germ&mdash;but they blossomed speedily, and their
fruit is recorded in the pages of history.  Chance showed
her how to study Naval appointments and movements in
newspapers; and chance settled the matter by guiding
her to the Navy List in the Free Library, where she could
study the whole commissioned personnel of the Navy and
watch the weary climb of Lieutenant-Commander
R. E. S. Saville-Samarez up the heights of Seniority with the ogre
of the age limit continually in pursuit.  From this it was but
a step to those books of reference which described every
fighting ship in the world, and in which she could study
each successive ship to which Samarez was appointed.  It
was not long before Agatha had quite a developed knowledge
of armaments and tonnages and displacements.  She
could read about protective decks without bewilderment;
she could even follow arguments on the burning question of
'Should Armoured Cruisers take their Place in the Line?'
It was an extraordinary hobby for a woman to take up; but
no one ever dare predict in what direction a woman cut off
and isolated from the world will expend her energies.  The
Library found all sorts of books on its shelves to interest
Agatha; she had no use for fiction of course, as became her
upbringing, and she read Lives of various admirals, and
Naval Histories, and the 'Letters of Lord Nelson.'  If essay
writing had been in her line she could have written quite
a fair essay on Howe's Tactics on the First of June, or on
Nelson's refusal in defiance of orders to expose Sicily.
Innumerable references in the books led her on to the study
of Mahan and his classic studies of Sea Power, and from
thence she was lured inevitably to deep and solemn
consideration of the immense sombre influence of maritime
supremacy, of the doctrine of the Fleet in Being, and other
things which other people do not think twice about.  With
pathetic cunning she early began to lead young Alberts
thoughts in the same direction.  If Albert had no genius,
then orderly training and astute education of taste might
serve the same purpose.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Deane, the solicitor, could not understand it.  He
pulled his patriarchal whiskers and stroked his domed
forehead, sorely puzzled by Agatha's repeated demands that
he should ascertain for her the conditions of entry on the
<i>Britannia</i>, and the costs of a naval education and similar
highfalutin' absurdities.  He ventured to point out that it
Agatha persisted in her decision to send young Albert to
the Navy she could count him lost to her from the age of
twelve.  Agatha fully realized it already, and set her jaw as
she told him so.  Agatha believed that self-sacrifice was the
primary duty of mankind; that man (and much more so
woman) was born to sorrow; and that she should give up
her child seemed to her right and proper, especially if the
Navy benefited.  The British Navy was to her the noblest
creation in the world; it was the outward and visible
manifestation of the majesty of God.  Mr. Deane sighed
incredulously and impatiently; he had been brought up in a world
where women never had any ideas of their own and never,
never dreamed of acting contrary to masculine advice.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps it was this impatience of his which impelled him
along the steep and slippery road on which his footsteps
were even then straying.  Perhaps he could not bear to see
good money wasted on sending Albert Brown to the
<i>Britannia</i>, and he embezzled it as the only method of
prevention.  Joking apart, Agatha's insistence must really be
taken into account in estimating the circumstances of the
misdeeds of that venerable old hypocrite.
</p>

<p>
Temptation certainly came his way.  A whole series of
road improvements and tramway extensions and industrial
developments in South-East London had led to the sale of
a great deal of house property lately&mdash;Agatha's included.
Mr. Deane found himself in charge temporarily of a large
amount of his clients' capital.  Mr. Deane&mdash;the awful truth
appeared later&mdash;led two lives, one in the company of his
good wife, and the other in the company of a damsel of a
class which the newspapers sometimes designated as 'fair
Cyprians.'  Mr. Deane's expenses were naturally in excess of
his income.  Mr. Deane endeavoured to right such a state of
affairs by tactful speculation.  Mr. Deane selected the South
African market as the field of his activities.  Mr. Deane lost
money, for South African securities slumped heavily before
the threat of the South African War.  Mr. Deane shrank
from the thought of suicide, or of prison and poverty.
Mr. Deane gathered together what remained of his clients'
negotiable assets and departed for Callao, accompanied by
the fair Cyprian.  The Official Receiver found much work to
do in clearing up the ruin left by Mr. Deane.
</p>

<p>
Agatha's money had nearly all vanished.  The Official
Receiver sorted out for her a tiny fraction of the original
capital, but it was a woefully small amount.  The fate which
Will Brown had predicted for her money had descended
upon it.  It was that fact, that prophecy of Will's, quite as
much as anything else, which made Agatha set her lips and
turn with energy into continuing her life's work without
reference to her family.  She would not go back to them, nor
crave their help.  She would not have them say, 'I told
you so'.  The fine sewing which she had done light-heartedly
before to earn luxuries now was called upon to
supply necessities.  Lucky it was that she had built up a
connection, and that not much further effort was needed to
establish herself in the good graces of the local big drapers
and gain herself a small but assured market.  No <i>Britannia</i>
for Albert now.  If she had thought her father or her
brothers would have supplied the money for that she would
have gone back to them and eaten humble pie, eaten the
bread of penitence and drunk the waters of affliction, but
she was all too sure that they would not.  Their idea of their
duty towards her would include the necessity of boarding
Albert out and getting rid of him, to the colonies or the
mercantile marine, as rapidly, inconspicuously and
inexpensively as possible.  They were heathens, infidels, upon
whom the light of the Navy had not descended.
</p>

<p>
So fine sewing, embroidery, pleating and button-making
continued to earn the daily bread of Agatha and Albert.
One more set of plans had to be devised for Albert's future.
If he was to receive a commission in the usual way (perhaps
it was as well that Mr. Deane had been involved with
the fair Cyprian, for Albert might easily never have made
his way past a Selection Board) then he must gain one in
the unusual way.  Commissions sometimes were gained by
the lower deck&mdash;'aft through the hawsehole' was the
technical expression.  Albert must begin as a seaman and
work his way upward.  If he started with sound ideas on
his profession, with enthusiasm&mdash;fanaticism&mdash;and a good
general education, it might well come about.  Agatha kept
her two hundred pounds in the bank against that day, when
he would need an outfit and some money to spend, and
flung herself with ardour into the business of providing
Albert with the grounding she thought necessary.
</p>

<p>
That was easy enough, for Albert was an amenable little
boy, and he had not nearly enough personality (it would
have been extraordinary if he had) to withstand the infection
of all Agatha's enthusiasm.  A board school education
was of course all his mother could afford for him, but a
board school education backed up by strong home influence
will do as much for any boy up to eleven years of age as
any other form of education.  Agatha had been taught at a
young ladies' college, but her sound common sense and
mighty will enabled her to recover from this catastrophe.  So
that even while Agatha was entering upon the study of the
higher aspects of Sea Power and gaining a blurred insight
into the ballistics of big gunnery she was at the same time
helping Albert with his sums and beginning his first
tentative introduction to Drake and Nelson.
</p>

<p>
Tentative indeed, for Agatha found it impossible to
bestow upon Albert the high dramatic insight which infused
her dreams.  Ships were just ships to young Albert.  He could
not picture them, as Agatha did, as minute fragments of
man-made matter afloat on an enormous expanse of water,
smaller relatively than grains of dust upon a tennis lawn,
which yet could preserve, positively and certainly, an island
from a continent.  Albert could not be impressed (perhaps it
was more than could ever be expected of a ten-year-old)
by the mighty pageant of England's naval history.  Lagos
and Quiberon, the Nile and Trafalgar were to him mere
affairs where Englishmen asserted their natural superiority
over Frenchmen; their enormous consequences, both
hidden and dramatic, were to him inconceivable.  He was a
matter-of-fact young man, and Agatha dully realized the
fact, with vague disappointment.  Even Agatha, with all her
dreams and insight, could not foresee the sprouting of the
grain she was sowing in such seemingly inhospitable soil.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter VII</i>
</h3>

<p>
With the birth of her child Agatha suddenly entered upon
a wonderful late blooming, like the blossoming of an
autumn rose.  She put on a little more flesh&mdash;but flesh in
the 1890's was in no way the abomination it was to become
in later years.  When Agatha walked nowadays she gave
hints of broad, motherly hips and ample, comfortable
thighs beneath her skirt, and her arms were very, very
plump and round, and her face had filled out smoothly and
deliciously, accentuating the creaminess of her really lovely
complexion.  She was a fine Junoesque woman now, stately,
queenly even, and her stateliness was borne out by the
dignified placidity of her facial expression.  She was a
mother to be proud of&mdash;a mother, especially, to admire;
small wonder then, that young Albert was strongly
influenced by her ideas and never dreamed of acting contrary
to them.
</p>

<p>
Little Mr. Gold loved her at first sight.  He was a nice
refined little gentlemanly man, whose name was most
eminently appropriate, for he had hair of pale gold (not as
much, now, alas, as he once had had) and gold-rimmed
spectacles, and across his insignificant little stomach was a
gold watch-chain with a gold medal.  He was neat in his
dress and precise in his habits, and when one was once able
to overlook the faintly receding chin and the general lack of
personality about his face he was quite a handsome little
fellow; it was a pity that all his character had been refined
right away.  Mr. Gold in conversation often made great play
with remarks about 'leading boys instead of driving them'
and 'kindliness always tells in the long run,' and this, it is to
be feared, were outward signs of an inward timidity, for
Mr. Gold was a master at an elementary school&mdash;at the school
Albert attended, in fact.  Mr. Gold, when he was taking a
class, would often make a great show of anger; he would
shake his fists and try to make his eyes (little pale blue eyes)
flash fire, and he flattered himself that by so doing he was
successful in intimidating the boys, but Mr. Gold never
entered into conflict of personality with boys singly, never
caned one, lout of fourteen or child of eight, without feeling
an inward tremor of doubt&mdash;'What on earth shall I do if he
won't hold out his hand when I tell him?'  Mr. Gold had
even developed the weakest characteristic of a master; he
would send big riotous boys to the headmaster for quite
minor offences, dodging a personal clash under the voiced
explanation that they had done something much too wicked
for him to deal with.
</p>

<p>
All this, though, was quite lost on young Albert when he
was moved up from the infants' school and entered Mr. Gold's
class in the boys' school.  If Mr. Gold had any effect
at all upon Albert, it was a slight impression of neatness
and dapperness; Albert had too great a respect for
authority to dream that it might ever be possible for a
master to have limbs of water and a heart of fear.  And
when, one evening, just after school, Albert fell down in the
playground and cut his chin rather badly, Albert was quite
grateful to Mr. Gold for the kindly manner in which he
washed the cut and staunched the bleeding and inquired
how he was feeling now; and finally Albert took it quite
kindly that Mr. Gold should walk down Colchester Road
with him in case he should feel ill on the way, and to
explain to his mother that the bloodstains on his shirt and
collar were not really his fault.
</p>

<p>
It was of course tea-time when Mr. Gold and Albert
reached No. 37 Colchester Road; the china gleamed upon
the tablecloth and the kettle steamed beside the fire.  What
could be more natural than that Mr. Gold should be asked
to have a cup?  And nothing could be more natural than that
Mr. Gold, landlady-ridden bachelor that he was, should
yearn for the comfort of Mrs. Brown's sitting-room and
fireside, and should accept with alacrity&mdash;alacrity which
warmed into well-being when Mr. Gold began to notice
Mrs. Brown's beautiful complexion and well-filled bodice.
</p>

<p>
Young Albert, of course, as soon as the novelty of
having a schoolmaster to tea wore off, found the situation
irksome and quietly made his way out of the room, but
Mr. Gold lingered.  He expanded in the grateful warmth of
the fire and Agatha's well-trained deference towards the
superior sex.  They chatted amicably enough for quite
a while before at last Mr. Gold took himself off after having
begged permission to come again, and Agatha at his
departure found herself almost dreamy.  Queenly she was,
but she was of that type of queen which inclines towards a
Prince Consort.  Mr. Gold's personified inadequacy made a
very definite appeal to her.  Why, he was almost shorter
than her; she could pick him up and carry him if she
wanted to.  And he was so refined and gentlemanly too (as
a matter of fact, 'refaned' was the most frequent word on
his lips), while he avoided being so terrifyingly of the
public school class as Commander Saville-Samarez.  Agatha
actually began to calculate what effect a marriage with
Mr. Gold might have upon her cherished ambition for Albert,
and she decided it would be a good one.
</p>

<p>
And of course, Agatha having decided that, Mr. Gold's
career as a bachelor was as good as ended.  Not that he was
unwilling; he walked away from No. 37 through the dusky
side streets with his mind full of rosy visions.  Mr. Gold was
not at all a man to think often about arms and legs, and
certainly not about the other parts of the female body, but
he caught himself doing so quite often that evening.  The
hang of the back of Agatha's skirt, and her neat hands, and
her sweet face and firm bosom all conspired to set him
imagining.  Next morning in class he treated Albert with
such downright favouritism that Albert's fellow
nine-year-olds turned and rent him at playtime.
</p>

<p>
But one single moment of expansion sufficed to destroy
all Mr. Gold's chances.  The pity of it was that he was never
to know what it was which snatched from his reach all
Agatha's sweet charms, which deprived him of the encirclement
of her round white arms, which barred him for ever
from the paradise of her breast and the calm sweetness of
her throat.  It was at Mr. Gold's third visit, or it may have
been his fourth&mdash;it was his last, at any rate.  Mr. Gold was
sitting by the fire in the single armchair; he was
comfortably inflated with tea and hot buttered toast and an
extraordinary good opinion of himself; all three combined
to bulge out his waistcoat.
</p>

<p>
Agatha, of course, as an inferior female ought to do, was
sitting before the fire on a less comfortable chair, bent over
her sewing.  The charming femininity of the pose made a
vast appeal to Mr. Gold; he admired the bent head and
neck with the firelight playing upon them; whiteness and
roundness combined to set little pink pictures moving at
the back of his mind.  He even visualized Agatha's legs in
their trim stockings&mdash;and of course, as the old vulgar
saying has it, there was something in her stocking besides
her leg!  Agatha <i>and</i> a bit of money; an efficient
housekeeper and a white-armed wife!  The picture was far too
irresistible.  Mr. Gold puffed himself out a little more; soon
he would propose, and he would taste the honeyed sweetness
of those demure lips.  Meanwhile, the present line of
conversation was pleasant; he continued it, laying down the
law to the accompaniment of Agatha's dutiful 'Reallys?'
and 'of courses.'
</p>

<p>
Agatha too, as she sewed, had little pictures, only not
nearly as defined, at the back of her mind.  Not, of course,
that she visualized any normally clothed portion whatever
of Mr. Gold's anatomy.  Agatha did not have that sort of
imagination.  But she had vague ideas of feeling Mr. Gold's
weak little face pressing upon her breast, and of clasping
him in her arms, and of spending every evening as a wife
should in the less comfortable of the two chairs by the fire
while a tired husband told her what she ought to think
about the world in general.  But she suddenly stopped
sewing, aghast, when the import of Mr. Gold's latest
remarks penetrated to her active intelligence.
</p>

<p>
'And all this money we spend on unproductive things
too,' Mr. Gold was saying.  'I don't believe in it.  A
one-and-sixpenny income tax will ruin the country before very long.
Look at the money we spend on the Army and the Navy.
Millions.  This Dreadnought that they speak about.
Twelve-inch guns and all.  To my mind it's only an excuse for
spending money so that there will be more places for
people's nephews and cousins.  What do we want a Navy
for?  Who's going to attack us, and what good would they
get by it, and what harm would it do, anyway?  A Navy
doesn't do any good to anyone except the people who get
good jobs in it.  Germany's getting just as bad, apparently.
It's all a lot of silly dangerous nonsense.  Look at the last
war.  What right had we got in South Africa?  None at all.
We were wrong to fight, and it was the hotheads who forced
us into it.  I said so all along, although of course it made me
unpopular.  That was why I had to change my school and
come to Colchester Road.  They called me a pro-Boer, and
all that sort of thing.  But I stuck it out.  I'm a man of peace,
I am.'
</p>

<p>
Mr. Gold only ceased when he noticed the look on
Agatha's face.  That so alarmed him that he got up from
his chair.
</p>

<p>
'Good gracious, Mrs. Brown, whatever's the matter?  Are
you unwell?'
</p>

<p>
'No,' said Agatha, shrinking away from him.  'No.'
</p>

<p>
She was merely appalled by the heresies she had heard
enunciated.  That Mr. Gold, whom she thought she liked,
should be a Little Englander, an advocate of disarmament,
a pro-Boer, a scoffer at the Dreadnought!  It was far too
terrible for words.  At the same moment she realized what
a terribly narrow escape she had had.  She dreaded to think
what the result upon Albert might have been had he had
Mr. Gold as a stepfather.  Fancy a world without a British
Navy!  It was dreadful.  Mr. Gold, try as he would, could
have thought of nothing to say that could have hurt her
more.
</p>

<p>
'No,' said Agatha.  'I'm quite well.'
</p>

<p>
Quite unconsciously she was imitating the heroines of the
novels she had read in the dead old days before the British
Navy took hold of her.  She 'drew herself up to her full
height,' her eyes 'flashed fire,' she 'made an imperious
gesture.'
</p>

<p>
'Please&mdash;&mdash;' said Mr. Gold.
</p>

<p>
'I&mdash;I think it is time for you to go,' said Agatha.
Poor Mr. Gold simply could not understand it.
</p>

<p>
'But, Mrs. Brown&mdash;&mdash;'
</p>

<p>
All Agatha did was to walk across the room and open
the door, and it would have taken someone of stronger
personality than Mr. Gold to have withstood the implied
command.  He crept out crestfallen, and Agatha shut the
parlour door decisively behind him.  Nothing remained for
Mr. Gold to do except to take his hat and coat from the
pegs on the landing, stumble downstairs, and let himself
out.
</p>

<p>
'Now listen, Mrs. Rodgers,' said Agatha that evening,
'if that&mdash;man ever comes again, tell him I'm not at home.
You understand?'
</p>

<p>
And she looked so queenly and her eyes flashed so
bright as she said it that Mrs. Rodgers could only say 'Lor,
mum, yes, mum,' and gaze at her with admiration and
without a thought of asking questions.  Moreover, when
Mr. Gold, inevitably, came calling again, she conveyed Agatha's
message to him with such force and unction as simply to
infuriate the unfortunate little man.  He had written to her
already, and Agatha had simply ignored his letter.  He made
up for it in the end by calling Albert out of class and giving
him a good hiding for no reason whatever.
</p>

<p>
When Albert told his mother about it later Agatha
merely nodded and offered no consolation.  She did not
mind at all if antipathy sprang up between Albert and the
heretical Mr. Gold.  Quite on the contrary.  Besides, Agatha
knew, without even Albert telling her, that hidings from
Mr. Gold were not of much account.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Gold eventually solaced his puzzled exasperation by
convincing himself that Agatha was mad.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter VIII</i>
</h3>

<p>
So years followed years, and each succeeding year dragged
more heavily and more painfully than did the one before.
To Agatha's tortured conscience it seemed as if retribution
was being exacted from her for her vile sin.  To her it was
natural that a lifetime of pain and squalor should be
the consequence of a five days' madness.  Fine sewing
sank steadily in value; private customers fell away&mdash;the
economic causes of a falling birth-rate and marriage-rate
broke her on their wheel.  There was not so much demand
nowadays for baby clothes or wedding dresses, and
simplicity was creeping into fashion even in such garments as
were ordered of her.  The shops which had first bought
her output had grown larger and had amalgamated, and
obscurely she was squeezed out from supplying them.
Competition was growing fiercer, and money was scarcer in the
1900's than it had been in the 1890's.  Agatha's earnings
grew smaller, and there were often weeks when she had to
draw upon her hoarded capital to meet Mrs. Rodgers's
weekly bill.  She was finding less work and smaller pay for
what she did.
</p>

<p>
Nor was this all.  Physical pain, that last exaction by a
relentless deity in payment for her sin, had come into her
life.  Sometimes it was slight, and Agatha could seemingly
set it aside unnoticed.  But at the other times it was sharper,
more intense, drastic.  It was not a fair pain.  It did not come
upon her when she was expecting it and braced against it.
When she stood up from her chair and held herself ready
for it, it did not come, but the instant she relaxed to go on
with what she was doing it fell upon her and rent her with
agony.  It was a fierce, horrible pain.
</p>

<p>
It had begun to come upon her when Albert was eleven,
when he had grown into a thick-set freckled boy with
unruly hair just like his father's.  He had done more than his
masters had expected of him by winning a scholarship and
proceeding from the Council School to a Secondary School.
Agatha's careful supervision of his studies thus bore its first
fruit.  She was maternally proud of his progress even while
she had to reconcile herself to the fact that he was only an
ordinary little boy&mdash;just like what his father must have
been.  Agatha, with a growing obsession of sin, tried hard
not to think of Albert's father, but Albert reminded her of
him at every turn, overwhelming her with conscience-stricken
yearning for something unknown&mdash;certainly not
for further contact with the Commander, even though she
had followed his progress step by step up the Navy List,
and had watched apprehensively the reports of the
combined expedition in China in 1900 (wherein Commander
Saville-Samarez had led a portion of the Naval Brigade),
and had even prayed that he would not be damagingly
involved in the great Fisher-Beresford feud which was then
threatening the Navy with disruption.
</p>

<p>
Agatha still was up to date in naval affairs.  She followed
all the twists and turns of the controversy between Lord
Charles and Sir John; she appreciated the trend of the new
construction so that the details of the <i>Dreadnought</i>, when
they were published, roused no surprise in her; she
thoroughly understood the import of Fisher's new policy at
the Admiralty whereby ships were scrapped in scores and
the Navy recalled to home waters until nine of its guns out
of ten were pointing at Germany.
</p>

<p>
But all that, of course, was before pain came upon her.
Pain, and the pressing need of seeking more and more
work, began to distract her from this life study.  She tried to
accept the pain in the philosophic spirit with which she had
accepted all the other buffetings of Fate.  Pain was all a
woman should expect, especially a woman who had sinned
as grievously and unrepentantly as she.  Pain was natural to
a woman at her time of life.  Pain&mdash;the grinding, lacerating
spasms of agony brought sweat down her drawn face and
made her gasp and choke even as she was trying to explain
it to herself.  She lost her smooth, placid good looks.  Her
cheeks fell inwards and her mouth compressed itself into a
harder line.  Wrinkles came between her eyebrows as a
result of the continual distortion of her forehead during the
agonizing bursts of pain.
</p>

<p>
Young Albert, full of the pressing and immediate
interests of a new school, and a secondary school at that,
did not notice the gradual change which came over his
mother&mdash;nor is it specially surprising, seeing that Agatha
always managed to raise a smile for him on his entrance,
and continued, with a fervour more vivid than ever, to
impress upon him the great tradition of Duty and the
magnificence of England upon the seas, rousing his limited
imagination to heights one would have thought unscalable
to such a combination of the solemn and matter-of-fact.
He did not even notice at first his mother's unaccountable
fits of sudden abstraction and convulsive gripping of the
arms of her chair.
</p>

<p>
But there came a time when even Agatha could no longer
endure the torment, nor explain it to herself as natural in a
woman of forty-three.  For the second time in her life she
yielded up her body to Doctor Walters's anxious examination,
and for the second time listened to his verdict.  A
different verdict this time, delivered sadly instead of
jovially, with regret instead of hope.  Even as he spoke
Agatha realized that what he was saying was not news to
her&mdash;it only voiced a fact she had refused to admit to
herself.  Doctor Walters's heart was wrung with pity, as only a
heart can be upon which pity makes continual demands,
the while he told her what he had found, told her of the
operation which would be necessary&mdash;and strove to keep
from his voice any hint of what he knew would be the end
even after the operation.  Agatha looked him in the face as
he spoke; she was not of the stuff that flinches.  It was
Doctor Walters instead who avoided a meeting of the eyes.
He was sick at heart the while he chafed to himself about
the cursed suffering obstinacy of womankind which
postpones action until action is too late.
</p>

<p>
So Albert came home from school to a new world, a
world where Mrs. Rodgers had to deputize for a mother
who had vanished, her place preposterously taken by a
shattered wreck in the hospital, moaning vaguely and
turning dim, unseeing eyes upon him.  He went on at school in
the unimaginative fashion which was to be expected, but
now his Wednesday afternoons and Saturday afternoons
were spent in journeys to the hospital and in a few fleeting,
worried minutes in a chair beside his mother's bed.
</p>

<p>
She died hard, died game, as befitted the daughter of a
self-made man.  She rallied round despite the fearful things
they did to her with knives.  For a little while the authorities
even began to think that she would make a recovery, unexpected
and nearly inconceivable.  For a little while understanding
returned to her, and she was able to smile upon
the scared little boy at her bedside and talk to him sensibly
about his work&mdash;and his future.  That future!  There was
one afternoon when she stretched her arm out suddenly
from the bedclothes (a frightening arm; pain and suffering
had stripped the smooth flesh from it and left it a skinny
bundle of bones and tendons) and pointed at him.
</p>

<p>
'Albert,' she said, 'Albert, you know about the Navy?
You know you're going to join the Navy?'
</p>

<p>
'Of course, mother,' said Albert.  That had been
understood between them for years now.
</p>

<p>
'Promise me, then, boy,' said Agatha.  Her eyes were too
large for her thin face, and she gazed at him with an
intensity which scared him.
</p>

<p>
'Of course I will, mother.  Of course.'
</p>

<p>
Agatha's scarecrow hand dropped, and she turned aside
her face contentedly again, much to Albert's relief.
</p>

<p>
But before ever she had begun to regain strength the
cancer which had gnawed at her lifted up its foul head
again.  There was a significant shaking of heads among the
hospital staff.  Next time Albert came he found a feebler,
stranger mother still.  She did not know him.  Her eyelids
were drooped until the line of the pupil they still allowed
to show appeared inhuman and unnatural.  She was inert
and dreamy.  Opium had her; the doctors were kind.  She
would die the pleasant death of the poppy, and not that of
the lunatic torture of cancer.  Each succeeding visit of
Albert's found her muttering and silly.  Towards the end
pain reasserted itself.  Opium began to lose its mastery, and
little stabs of agony showed themselves on her face, and a
surprised ejaculation or two broke through her mutterings.
Yet Fate was kind enough; Agatha's life went out of her
while she floated above a vast grey sea sombrely tinted with
opium, while around her loomed up the immense beetling
silhouettes of the battle squadrons, the grey, craggy citadels
of England's glory and hope.  Their funnel smoke swirled
round her, veiling the worried freckled face of the child of
her sin, and she smiled happily.  Mrs. Rodgers wept hysterically
on Albert's shoulder.
</p>

<p>
For Mrs. Rodgers had gloried vicariously in Agatha's
illness.  It was of the right savoury type to appeal to her.  It
was something to talk about with pride to her friends, with
much whisperings of gory and distorted detail; it was a
disease from which only women could suffer, and hence a
source of immense interest.  'Orsepitals and operations and
cancer of the womb&mdash;why, they provided her with precedence
in conversation for months afterwards.  She had,
naturally, full charge of the funeral arrangements
subsequently too, and that was unmixed delight.  There was a
hundred pounds in Agatha's account at the bank, so that
Mrs. Rodgers had no need whatever to skimp or scrape
about it.  Agatha could have a funeral worthy of the lady
she was.  She could have the best oak coffin, and a
first-class 'earse, and 'eaps and 'eaps of flowers&mdash;Mrs. Rodgers
bought two or three wreaths out of Agatha's money,
because of course Agatha had not known enough people
for their contributions to make a good enough show&mdash;and
two coaches.  Mrs. Rodgers was able to ask all her intimate
cronies too, and indulge in all the orgy of ghoulish
formality for which her soul craved.  Albert had to have a
black suit, and a black tie, and black gloves&mdash;Mrs. Rodgers
would have insisted on a black shirt too if there had been
any shadow of precedent for it&mdash;and travel in the first coach
as chief mourner along with Mrs. Rodgers and Mr. Dickens,
the vicar, and two of Mrs. Rodgers's best friends.
And there were mutes in plenty, in tall hats and frock-coats,
walking with solemn, dignified sorrow beside the hearse.
And when the business was over there was a real slap-up
dinner at No. 37, with cold 'am and tongue and beef and
trifle and port and sherry, with afterwards cup after cup
of strong tea and delightful conversation around the fire
with half a dozen women with their best party manners and
black gowns.  Quite one of the happiest and most satisfactory
days in all Mrs. Rodgers's life.  Albert went through
it all in a walking nightmare, and afterwards remembered
hardly anything about it.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter IX</i>
</h3>

<p>
There is little enough need to lay emphasis on the next
section of Albert Brown's career.  Aged fourteen and a half,
he could not join the Navy (as he knew already) until he
was fifteen and a quarter.  Mrs. Rodgers fussed over him
until even he, insensitive though he was, could hardly bear
the sight of her.  He said good-bye to his school with hardly
a twinge of regret; he had early been impregnated with
Agatha's fatalistic tendencies and he could, even at fourteen,
accept the inevitable without complaint.  Totally without
introspection and without much notice for the circumstances
in which he found himself, he was never more than
vaguely unhappy during the following nine months.
</p>

<p>
He had the sense to keep to himself his crystallized
determination to join the Navy as soon as he was old
enough&mdash;he never said very much at any time&mdash;and the
school sympathetically found him an office boy's position
with a City firm.  The only part of his life that he really
hated was the bowler hat which convention compelled him
to wear&mdash;even Albert could appreciate the hideous
incongruity of a bowler hat on a fourteen-year-old head&mdash;and it
was not until afterwards that he realized how much he
detested everything connected with an office boy's life.  He
left home (he called Mrs. Rodgers's house 'home' still) at
ten minutes to eight each morning, and he came back at
half-past six each night.  He travelled on a tram to
Blackfriars from Camberwell Green and to Camberwell Green
from Blackfriars.  He swept out the front office, he filled
ink-wells, he took messages (painfully learning his way
about London in the process); he brought in cups of tea
from the teashop next door (this was, of course, before the
era of regular office teas); he copied letters; he was slightly
initiated into the beginnings of book-keeping, he experienced
the incredible boredom and occasional fierce spasms
of work which everyone in an office experiences.  And
since ordinary diligence was habitual to him, and honesty
was part of his mental content, and he had brains of a
quite good average order, he was looked upon with approving
eyes by the powers that were, and after six months his
wages were raised from five shillings a week to seven and
sixpence.  This official recognition gave him no thrill of
pride or pleasure; office life was a mere marking time
before he took the tremendous stride towards the goal he
not merely desired, but considered necessary and inevitable.
The time came at length for him to take it.
</p>

<p>
When Albert Brown was fifteen years and three months
old all but one week he approached the chief clerk and gave
him the week's notice which the law demanded.  The chief
clerk looked Albert up and down and whistled softly in
surprise.  He remembered painful experiences with other
office boys, Albert's predecessors, who were one and all
slack and unpunctual and dishonest and given to lying and
who were intolerable nuisances to every one.  He contemplated
with dismay a renewal of these experiences and all
the bothersome inconveniences of having to train another
boy.  He realized that stocktaking, the quarterly upheaval,
was nearly due, and that Albert's absence would be really
tiresome.
</p>

<p>
'What in hell do you want to leave for?' he demanded.
'Or are you just playing up for another rise?'
</p>

<p>
'Don't want a rise,' said Albert.  'I only want to give
notice.'
</p>

<p>
'Got another job, I suppose?' said the chief clerk.
</p>

<p>
'No,' said Albert.
</p>

<p>
'Well, you <i>are</i> a looney,' decided the chief clerk.  'You're
getting on well here.  In another six months&mdash;or any day, in
fact&mdash;you'll be junior clerk here.  Look at <i>me</i>.  I was
junior clerk here, once.  What in the name of Jesus do you
want to give notice for?  Had a fortune left you?'
</p>

<p>
'No,' said Albert.
</p>

<p>
'Well, what are you going to do, then?'
</p>

<p>
'I'm going to join the Navy,' said Albert.
</p>

<p>
'Whe-e-e-ew,' said the chief clerk; he was certain now
that Albert was crazy.
</p>

<p>
The office entirely agreed with him.  Only boys who were
suffering from an overdose of penny dreadfuls would ever
dream of leaving the sequestered calm of an office for the
uncertain turbulence of a fighting service&mdash;and they would
not do more than dream of it.  As for acting upon the
dream, throwing up a safe job for a trifling whim, that was
sheer lunacy.  The Junior Partner himself saw fit to emerge
from his Olympian seclusion and to discuss the matter with
this extraordinary office boy; there were almost tears in his
eyes as he besought Albert to reconsider his decision; in the
end he utterly broke down&mdash;broke down far enough, at any
rate, to offer Albert yet another half-crown a week on to his
princely salary if only he would stay on and not blast his
career in this fashion.  But even this mighty condescension
and this magnificent temptation left Albert unmoved.  He
hardly noticed them, although the storm of incredulous
astonishment his announcement raised (quite unexpectedly
to him, for he considered it the most logical move possible
to join the Navy at fifteen and a quarter) left him slightly
bewildered.  He persisted in giving notice.  In the end the
Junior Partner yielded.  He patted Albert on the shoulder,
and swallowed hard, and produced some second-hand
platitudes about the Navy&mdash;'wish more people had as much
interest in the Navy'&mdash;'very healthy and natural for a boy
to want to join'&mdash;'Nelson'&mdash;'England expects'&mdash;'hope you
do well, my boy.'  Then finally, and most extraordinary of
all, he fished three half-crowns out of his pocket, gave them
to Albert as his next week's wages, and told him he could
leave now and have a week's holiday before taking the
decisive step.  For which ridiculous proceeding he was
heartily cursed (privately) by the outer office, which he had
heedlessly left office-boy-less, the while he earned no
gratitude whatever from Albert, who did not find any joy
in a week spent hanging disconsolately about unnecessarily
exposed to the maudlin pleadings of Mrs. Rodgers, who
wept profusely over him at every opportunity, and who
took it for granted that entry into the Navy implied an
immediate watery grave.
</p>

<p>
Authority at Whitehall, when Albert presented himself,
received him with open arms.  This was the kind of stuff
they needed for the Navy&mdash;an orphan without a relation in
the world, and no half-starved weakling either, but a sturdy,
well-set-up young man of undoubted physique.  Educated
too; three years at a secondary school, nine months in a
City office, with the very best of characters from both.
Written characters were not much evidence with most of
the stray candidates for admission to the Navy.  Boys from
good homes who joined at fifteen as a result of a vocation
were either the best of material or woefully bad bargains,
and Albert had all the earmarks of the good material.
Albert's birth certificate (Agatha, fifteen years ago, had
rendered herself, unknowingly, liable to imprisonment on
account of a false declaration to the registrar) was duly
inspected and passed.  He had no legal guardian (Albert
indignantly denied Mrs. Rodgers's claim to that position)
and no next-of-kin.  That was all quite uninteresting; the
Navy of course did not know (neither did Albert) that
Albert Brown was the only son of Captain Richard
E. S. Saville-Samarez, C.B., M.V.O., nor that through his
paternal grandmother he had two second cousins in the
peerage.
</p>

<p>
Yet, however it was, Albert was a man of mark after
six months at Shotley Barracks.  His was not an original
mind, Heaven knows, and he was not of distinguished
personality.  But a secondary school education which had
gone as far as the beginnings of trigonometry and
mechanics was not common at Shotley.  And he was not an
institution boy, nor was he the starveling scion of a poor
family either.  The institutions which supplied a great part
of the young entry were admirable affairs for the most part.
They fed and clothed and even taught the waifs who drifted
into them quite adequately, but no institution can help
being an institution.  The boys who came from them all
displayed, unavoidably, some signs of being machine made.
Independence of thought or action, careless assumption of
responsibility, spontaneous action&mdash;all these are, inevitably,
foreign to the boy who has spent all his life in a regular
routine under close adult supervision in narrow contact
with hundreds of his fellows.  Albert, on the other hand, had
the natural self-containedness of the only child; he was
accustomed to independent and solitary action; even those
hated months in the City office had served their turn in
broadening his mind and accustoming him to keeping his
head in encounters with strangers.  His memory was good
even though his brains were not brilliant, and little of the
hard-earned knowledge gained at school had faded out
during his City life.  The very elementary mathematics
taught at Shotley were child's play to him even while they
were stumbling blocks to his misty-minded fellows.  The
severely practical instruction in seamanship was a joy to his
logical mind, and his fingers were deft in their work and
powerful when strength was demanded.  Albert's main
competitors, in fact, were never the institution boys, but the
sons of seamen&mdash;-petty officers' sons destined to follow in
their father's footsteps, dockyard artificers' sons, and boys
from coast towns, in all of whom the tradition of the sea
was strongly imbued, and who had in most cases the same
sort of advantage over Albert in seamanship as he had over
them in theoretical work.  But to most of these boys rules
and regulations were a sad stumbling block.  Breaches of
discipline were unhappily habitual among them, thanks to
their exuberant high spirits and independent intolerance of
control.  For them was the cane, the extra lesson, the awful
terror of the Commander's wrath.  Good young Albert, who
found discipline merely a convenient means to an end,
knew nothing of these frightful penalties.  His record sheets
remained unstained by the black blots they bore in their
train.  Albert's career moved logically and inexorably
onwards through musketry and swimming and elementary
gunnery and seamanship and drill, from second-class
boyhood to first-class boyhood, from Shotley Barracks to
H.M. Training Ship <i>Ganges</i>, until at last even first-class
boyhood was left behind and he became a full-blown
ordinary seaman in the newly commissioned third-class
cruiser <i>Charybdis</i>, which left Portsmouth late in 1912 to
continue the old tradition (sadly weakened by new
strategical arrangements) of showing the Flag in Eastern
waters and to maintain the very necessary policing of those
rather disorderly shores.
</p>

<p>
Albert Brown was not, let it be repeated, of an imaginative
or romantic turn of mind.  It is doubtful if he
experienced any of the conventional thoughts as England
vanished from sight, or if emotion of any sort came to him.
Quite likely he was feeling annoyed about the lower-deck
crowding resulting from the fact that <i>Charybdis</i> was taking
out drafts on board for other ships on Eastern stations;
conceivably there passed through his mind some vague
wonderings about promotion; but his last glimpse of
England (the last of all his short life, as it turned out)
meant nothing more to him.  His intense love for his
country, his delight and pride in her naval might, his glory
in her past and his ambitions for her future, were real
enough and solid enough; they were a living and essential
part of him.  But they found no voice.  Brown had no use for
words in relation to them, and they were too deep to raise
any surface disturbance, any facile emotion.  Brown turned
stolidly to his duty the while the relentless thrust of
<i>Charybdis'</i> screws bore him away from the land for which
he was ready to give his life.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter X</i>
</h3>

<p>
The beginning of the war found <i>Charybdis</i> at Singapore.
There was a buzz of joy throughout the lower deck; even
among the ratings of the Navy the opinion had grown
stronger and stronger that Germany's huge naval effort
could only end in war between England and Germany, and
for years now the English sailor had forgotten the centuries-old
blood feud with France and had awaited with joyous
expectation the North Sea clash, in anticipation of which
he had been steadily withdrawn from the Mediterranean
and the Pacific by the foresight of his supreme controllers,
so that at the very time when England's Navy was stronger
than ever it had been there was a smaller English force
than ever before in Eastern waters.  And that summer night
when the First Fleet, happily mobilized, went speeding
northwards to its gloomy war station at Scapa, the 'preparative'
flashed by wireless and cable to the few scattered units
which flew the White Ensign in the Pacific.
</p>

<p>
For there was cause for some anxiety there.  Von Spee
was lost in the vast expanse of the ocean; he had cannily
cleared from Tsing-tao before ever the war clouds had
grown over-ominous, and no one knew where he might
appear or where he might strike.  His armoured cruisers,
<i>Gneisenau</i> and <i>Scharnhorst</i>, held the big gun records of
the German fleet, and what that meant was all too clear to
the minds of those who had gained an insight into the
achievements of German naval gunnery.  There were light
cruisers with him too; whether others had joined him since
his departure from Tsing-tao was not known for certain&mdash;Muller
with the <i>Emden</i> and von Lutz with the <i>Ziethen</i> were
free to attach themselves to him if they wished&mdash;but it was
obvious enough that he had a fast-moving, hard-hitting
squadron which any English fleet without battleships might
without shame be chary of encountering.  No one knew
where he might appear; he could strike at the South
American nitrate trade, at the Indian shipping, at the South
African coast where were Boer rebels and German armies
to welcome him; on the high seas there were fleets bearing
Australian troops, New Zealand troops, Indian troops,
English troops.  If one such fleet were left unconvoyed he
might encounter it and deal one of the most terrible blows
given in war.  At every point of danger there had to be
stationed against him a squadron of strength superior to
his own, and England was, as ever at the outbreak of war,
woefully short of cruisers.  The naval might of England had
definitely asserted its superiority&mdash;the German merchant
flag had vanished from the seas with the outbreak of war,
and the German battle fleet had withdrawn in sullen
impotence to the protection of its minefields&mdash;but here in
the Pacific there was this one rebel, hopeless and desperate,
who might yet strike a fierce blow or two before Fate
overtook him.
</p>

<p>
That in the end Fate would overtake him there was no
doubt whatever.  With the Japanese declaration of war and
siege of Tsing-tao he had no harbour left him.  Coal could
only be obtained with difficulty through German agents
established here and there before the war.  The myriad
spare parts he would need would be unobtainable; the
myriad small defects which would develop would be
irremediable.  His ships' bottoms would grow foul, and
there was no graving dock open to him.  Sooner or later,
whether or not he encountered an enemy, he would have to
call the game lost and seek internment in some neutral
port.  But were he not hunted down and destroyed the
material damage he might do would be enormous, and the
damage to British prestige would be more serious still.
Small wonder that the air was electric with messages flying
back and forth summoning all the scattered Pacific units of
the British fleet into rallying groups converging on the
million square miles wherein he lay concealed.
</p>

<p>
The lower deck ratings of the <i>Charybdis</i> thought nothing
of the task.  They put a happy trust in their officers, who
would bring a superior force against von Spee; and if they
were not in superior force, then English grit and English
gunnery would take no heed of odds and would carry
the matter through just as at Trafalgar or the Nile.  No man
aboard <i>Charybdis</i> but would cheerfully and eagerly have
accepted the chance to fight in that obsolescent cruiser
against <i>Scharnhorst</i> or <i>Gneisenau</i> with their deadly 8-inch
guns.  They eagerly anticipated victory; it is only giving
them their due to say further that they would have gone as
willingly to certain defeat for the Navy's sake.  For the
terrible superiority of the 5.9 over the almost obsolete Mark
W. 4.7 they cared nothing.  The lower-deck buzz was
cheerful and vigorous, and the knowledge that the war-heads
were being set in the torpedoes was sufficient compensation
for the hateful fatigue of hurried coaling.
</p>

<p>
Leading Seaman Albert Brown (he had been Leading
Seaman now for a fortnight after a bare year as Ordinary
Seaman, and another as A.B.) had a more intimate knowledge
of the facts and probabilities.  He knew, as did the
others, of the imminent hunt for von Spee, but he had a
clearer appreciation of the difficulties.  The <i>Charybdis</i> could
not hope to fight successfully any one of the majority of
von Spee's squadron, and she had hardly speed sufficient
to escape danger.  <i>Scharnhorst</i> or <i>Gneisenau</i>, those big
armoured cruisers, would blow her out of the water
instantly.  <i>Ziethen</i>, an earlier and smaller armoured cruiser,
would have hardly more difficulty.  Brown even foresaw
serious danger in an encounter with a light cruiser, with
<i>Emden</i> or <i>Dresden</i>, with their smaller but more modern
and dangerous guns.  But Brown had the better kind of
courage; he could foresee danger and not flinch, not even
inwardly.  If death came to him&mdash;well, he died, and that was
the end of speculation.  If not&mdash;war-time and an expanding
Navy meant promotion.  He was Leading Seaman now,
though barely twenty.  The commission he hardly dared to
think about seemed at last a faint possibility instead of an
incredible possibility.  Brown knew that it was the first step
in promotion which was the hardest to come by.
</p>

<p>
So <i>Charybdis</i> left Singapore hurriedly and drove eastward,
obedient to the flickering wireless, into the wide-spread
deserts of the Pacific.  This was the very earliest
beginning of the war, before Japan had turned against
Germany and sent her army to Kiao-chau, and her navy in
a wide sweep south-eastwards after von Spee.  <i>Charybdis</i>
took her course across the China Sea; she nosed her way
through the Carolines, exploring that straggling group of
flat, miserable islands, and from the Carolines she threaded
her way through dangerous seas on to the Marshalls.  On
the opposite side of the world an anxious Admiralty
awaited her reports, for the Carolines and Marshalls were
German possessions, and there, if anywhere, would von
Spee be found.  But a thousand miles of sea leaves much
room in which a small squadron can be lost, and <i>Charybdis</i>
missed contact with von Spee by the barest margin of
twenty-four hours.  <i>Charybdis'</i> negative reports, relayed
round the world, came in to puzzle the naval staff more
than ever.  They were at a loss to think where von Spee
could have hidden himself.  The Australian navy was on its
guard to the southward; the Japanese fleet was sweeping
down from the north; a concentration was gradually taking
shape at the Falklands.  There was a loosely-knit combination
forming against von Spee, but there was room enough
for him to slip through if he cared to.  Reports were
instantly to hand that Muller, in <i>Emden</i>, had indeed slipped
through; she was at large in the Indian Ocean, ravaging the
rich merchant shipping, capturing and sinking and destroying.
She had stolen in disguise within range of Madras, and
had shelled the invaluable oil tanks there.  But her
movements were no indication of von Spee's whereabouts, for he
had clearly detached her and moved in some new direction
himself&mdash;perhaps right across the Pacific.  Contact with him
must be made.  He might even pass the Panama Canal and
appear in the West Indies, and break across the Atlantic in
a desperate effort to reach home.  The wireless orders
summoned <i>Charybdis</i> farther yet across the Pacific, south again
to the Line to a secret coaling station and onwards towards
Panama, with every nerve strained awaiting the look-out's
report that von Spee was in sight&mdash;a signal to set the
wireless transmission crackling, proclaiming his presence to all
the world, the while the helm brought the ship round in
desperate flight from those deadly 8-inch guns.
</p>

<p>
Blind chance&mdash;the chance that had ordained von Spee
should evade <i>Charybdis</i> in the Marshalls, and which sent
him to his death at the Falklands&mdash;directed that here, in the
most desolate waters of the world, cruiser should meet
cruiser.  Von Spee, striking across to the South American
coast, had detached <i>Ziethen</i> (Captain von Lutz) with orders
to steer for Australasian waters.  <i>Ziethen</i>, with her large
displacement, her ten 6-inch guns and thick armour, would
be a match for any of the British light cruisers; against her
the British would have to scatter broadcast armoured
cruisers, and that implied an absence of defence against the
blow he meditated against the Falklands.  <i>Ziethen</i>, being in
no way homogeneous with his own squadron, could be well
spared.  So <i>Ziethen</i> was detached, and a thousand miles
from land she encountered <i>Charybdis</i>.
</p>

<p>
<i>Charybdis</i> saw a smudge of smoke on the horizon.
<i>Charybdis</i> steered towards it.  Soon <i>Ziethen's</i> three tall
funnels could be descried.  The Captain of <i>Charybdis</i> peered
anxiously through his glasses.  He ran through his memory
to pick out which remembered silhouette was hers.
</p>

<p>
'That's <i>Ziethen</i>,' said Captain Holt.  'Now where are the
others?'
</p>

<p>
For a few minutes both ships held on slightly divergent
courses, each anxious to ascertain whether the other was in
the company of others.  But no other smoke clouds showed
upon the horizon.  They were alone upon a waste of water.
</p>

<p>
'Fight or run?' said the Captain to himself, knowing the
answer as he said it.
</p>

<p>
Run?  He must not run.  It was his duty to shadow
<i>Ziethen</i> if he could not fight her, keep her under observation
by virtue of his half-knot superiority in speed until
someone came up who could fight her.  But shadow a ship
of superior force over two thousand miles of dangerous
sea with only such a tiny additional speed?  The odds would
be a hundred to one that he would lose her&mdash;and his
professional reputation along with her.  Leading Seaman Albert
Brown, gunlayer of No. 2 4.7 gun, at his action station,
paralleled his Captain's thoughts as they occurred.  He must
fight then&mdash;old 4.7's against new 5.9's, four thousand tons
against eight thousand.  Luck might aid him; a sea fight is
always a chancy business.  At the worst he might do
<i>Ziethen</i> some serious damage before <i>Charybdis</i> sank, and
the <i>Ziethen</i> seriously damaged meant the <i>Ziethen</i> rendered
useless, for she had no place where she might effect repairs.
</p>

<p>
'Action stations' had gone long ago; steam was being
raised in all boilers; the propellers were beating a faster
rhythm as both ships tried to work up to full speed,
swinging round each other in the momentary sparring before
rushing in to grapple.  The Captain put the glasses to his
eyes again, and while he did so, casually, as befitted an
Englishman at a mighty crisis, he spoke to the man at the
wheel.  Round went the wheel, and <i>Charybdis</i> heeled as she
swung round sharply under maximum helm at high speed.
The Captain was making the most of his chances, closing
the range as rapidly as possible to avoid as much as he
could being hit without being able to hit back.  Even as
<i>Charybdis</i> came round the wireless signalman was sending
out, over and over again, the message telling of the
encounter, giving latitude and longitude, trying to inform
the expectant British fleet where <i>Ziethen</i> was to be found.
And while he did so <i>Ziethen's</i> operator was 'jamming' hard.
No message could hope to get through that tangled confusion,
especially over a distance of thousands of miles, in
the unkindly ether of the Pacific.
</p>

<p>
But <i>Ziethen</i> was ready for <i>Charybdis'</i> manoeuvre.  Well
did Captain Lutz appreciate the superiority of the 6-inch
over the 4.7.  He put his helm over too, and <i>Ziethen</i> came
round until the courses of the two ships were almost
parallel, and, as <i>Charybdis</i> turned further, he continued his
turn until it almost seemed as if he were running away.  It
was a pretty sight, those two great ships wheeling round
each other on the blue, blue Pacific with a blue sky over
them and peace all about them.  Only the spread smudges
from the heavily smoking funnels marred the picture.
</p>

<p>
'Out of range still, curse them!' groaned the Gunnery
Lieutenant, hearkening to the monotonous chant of the
range-taking petty officer.
</p>

<p>
A sudden little haze became apparent round <i>Ziethen</i>, and
almost simultaneously a group of tall pillars of water shot
up suddenly from the surface of the sea two hundred yards
from <i>Charybdis'</i> bow.  The Gunnery Lieutenant started in
surprise.  Practice as good as this was more than he
expected.  <i>Charybdis</i> heeled again under pressure of helm
in her effort to close.  The tall fountains of water shot up
again, this time only a hundred yards from the quarter;
some of the water splashed on to <i>Charybdis'</i> deck.  The
thunder of <i>Ziethen's</i> guns did not reach her until half a
dozen seconds later.
</p>

<p>
'Bracketed, by God!' said the Gunnery Lieutenant, and
then, in surprised admiration of a worthy opponent, 'Good
shooting!  Dam' good shooting!'
</p>

<p>
<i>Charybdis</i> turned sharply to disconcert the German range-takers,
but the next salvo pitched close alongside, flooding
the decks with water.  Down below, below the level of
the water, under the protective deck, the stokers were
labouring like lunatics to supply the steam which was
being demanded so insistently; but <i>Ziethen's</i> stokers were
labouring too, and proof of their efforts was displayed in
the huge volumes of smoke pouring from her funnels.
Victory might well incline to the ship which first reached
her maximum speed; speed would enable <i>Charybdis</i> to
close, or enable <i>Ziethen</i> to keep away and continue to blast
her enemy with salvoes to which no reply was possible.
Once only did the Gunnery Lieutenant see his beloved guns
in action; once only.  They fired at extreme range, on the
upward roll, but it was a vain hope.  The Gunnery Lieutenant
groaned his bitter disappointment&mdash;the more bitter
because the hope had been so frail&mdash;when he saw the tall
columns of water leap half a mile on the hither side of the
enemy.  But the anguish of the Gunnery Lieutenant's soul
ended with his groan, for <i>Ziethen's</i> next salvo, flickering
down from the blue, came crashing fair and deadly upon
the <i>Charybdis'</i> deck; five 6-inch shells falling together.
They blew the Gunnery Lieutenant into bloody and
unrecognizable rags; they dashed to pieces the range-taking
petty officer and his instrument; they wiped out the crew of
No. 4 gun; they left the superstructure riddled and the
funnels tottering; they started a blaze of fire here, there
and everywhere, so that the Executive Officer and his
hose-party, choking in the smoke, could not cope with one-half
of the work before them.  Nor was that one salvo all.  Salvo
followed salvo, with barely half a minute between them.
The pitiless shells rained down upon the wretched ship,
smashing and rending and destroying.  The <i>Ziethen's</i>
gunners were toiling with the disciplined rapidity resulting
from years of gun drill, heaving up the heavy hundred-pound
shells and thrusting them home with a trained convulsive
effort, training, firing, reloading, not even, thanks
to their solid discipline, sparing a moment to view the ruin
they were causing.  <i>Charybdis</i> reeled beneath the blows;
smoke poured from her in increasing volume, but her vitals,
her motive power, were down below her protective deck,
and she could still grind through the water with
undiminished speed.  The Captain was down and dying, torn
open by a splinter, and it was the Commander who gave
the orders now; dead men lay round the guns, and the
stewards were bearing many wounded down below to
where the Surgeon laboured in semi-darkness; but scratch
crews manned the guns, which flamed and thundered at
hopelessly long range.  Yet fierce resolution, half a knot
more speed and a slightly converging course all did their
work.  The high-tossed pillars of water crept nearer to
<i>Ziethen</i>, and soon a shrill cheer from a gun-layer, cutting
through the insane din, greeted <i>Charybdis'</i> first hit.  There
were dead Germans now upon <i>Ziethen's</i> deck.
</p>

<p>
But <i>Charybdis</i> was a dying ship, even though the thrust
of her screws still drove her madly through the water.  Her
side was torn open; she would have been wrapped in flame
were it not that the shells pitching close alongside
sometimes threw tons of water on board and extinguished some
of the fire.  The merciless shells had riven and wrenched her
frail upper works until the dead there outnumbered the
living.  Her guns still spoke spasmodically through the
smoke; the White Ensign still flew overhead, challenging
the interloping Black Cross on a white ground which
flaunted itself from <i>Ziethen</i>.  When the oldest navy met the
newest, pride left no room for surrender; barbaric victory
or barbaric death were the only chances open to the iron
men in their iron ships.  Feebly spoke <i>Charybdis'</i> guns, and
for every single shell which was flung at <i>Ziethen</i> a full
salvo came winging back, five shells at a time, directed by
an uninjured central control, with the range known to a
yard.  Even as <i>Charybdis</i> made her last hit her death was in
the air.  It smote her hard upon her injured side; it reached
and detonated the starboard magazine so that a crashing
explosion tore the ship across.  The hungry sea boiled in;
the stokers and the artificers and the engineers whom the
explosion had not killed died in their scores as the water
trapped them below decks.  Even as the boilers exploded,
even as the ship drove madly below the surface, <i>Ziethen's</i>
last salvo smote her and burst amid the chaos caused by
its predecessors.  In thirty seconds <i>Charybdis</i> had passed
from a living thing to a dead, from a fighting ship to a
twisted tangle of iron falling through the sunlit upper
waters of the Pacific down into the freezing darkness of the
unfathomed bottom.  Above her the circling whirlpools
lived their scanty minute amid the vast bubbles which came
boiling up to the surface; a smear of oil and coal dust
marred the azure beauty of the Pacific, and at its centre
floated a little gathering of wreckage, human and inhuman,
living and dead&mdash;nearly all dead.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XI</i>
</h3>

<p>
The record of Brown's doings while <i>Charybdis</i> fought
<i>Ziethen</i> is not material to this history.  He was only a part
of a whole, and whatever he did the credit belongs not to
him, but to the Navy, the tremendous institution which had
trained him and disciplined him.  If in the last few desperate
moments he fought his gun without superior direction, that
was because handling a 4.7 under all conditions had been
grained into his nature; the credit should rather go to the
whiskered admirals of an earlier epoch who had laid down
the instructions for gun drill.  Brown was a brave man, and
he did not flinch from his post, but many men less brave
than he would have done the same had they been parts of
the same whole.  It was the Navy of the unrivalled past
which gained glory from the defeat of this, an inconsiderable
fraction of itself, just as that same Navy must bear the
blame, if blame there is.  That is as it should be, but at the
same time the argument hands over to Brown all the glory
and honour for what he did on Resolution, and to Brown
as an individual must be given the credit for the eventual
destruction of <i>Ziethen</i>.  For he acted on Resolution without
orders, on his own keen initiative, under conditions where
neither discipline nor training could help him.
</p>

<p>
That was all still in the future, however, and not one of
the German boat's crew which picked him up as they pulled
through the scattered wreckage knew that they would soon
meet their deaths through the agency of this shaken
fragment of humanity.  Very thoroughly did the boat's crew
search, rowing hither and yon over the oil-streaked water,
but they found little.  There were two dead men&mdash;one of
them so shattered that he hardly appeared human&mdash;two
or three wounded, and one merely half-stunned; this last
was a stoutly-built fellow of medium height, very freckled,
with hard grey eyes and light-brown hair, inclined to be
as rebellious as was possible within the narrow limits of its
close crop.  He was very badly shaken, having been blown
from the deck to the water when the magazine exploded,
and he was hardly conscious of holding on to a stray rolled
hammock which came to the surface providentially near
him when <i>Charybdis</i> sank.  He lay limp in the bottom of the
boat as it rowed back to <i>Ziethen</i>, and he had to be assisted
to the ship's deck.
</p>

<p>
All he wanted at that time was to allow his weakness to
overcome him, to fall to the deck and sleep heavily, but the
exigencies of war would not allow him that luxury.  He was
the only one of the three survivors of <i>Charybdis</i> who was
even half conscious, and Captain Lutz, bearing on his
shoulders the responsibility for <i>Ziethen</i> and her hundreds
of men, must know at once how <i>Charybdis</i> came to be
where she was; whether she had consorts near who could
have heard her wireless, whether the meeting was
intentional or accidental&mdash;everything, in fact, which would
enable him to spin out his little hour in being.  They did not
treat Brown unkindly; they dried him and gave him spirits
and wrapped him in a comfortable woollen nightshirt and
allowed him to sit in a chair in the dispensary beside the
sick-bay while he was being questioned.
</p>

<p>
Brown rolled dazed eyes over his questioners as he sat
huddled in his chair.  The bearded officer with the four rings
of gold lace must be <i>Ziethen's</i> captain, he knew; the young
officer was a sub-lieutenant; the shirt-sleeved man was the
Surgeon (who had been doing gory work on the half-dozen
wounded <i>Charybdis'</i> shells had injured), and the naval
rating in the background was the sick-bay steward.
</p>

<p>
Fierce and keen were the Captain's questions, uttered in
a guttural and toneless English; occasionally the Captain
would turn and speak explosively in German to the
Sub-Lieutenant, who in turn would address Brown in an English
far purer and without a trace of accent.  Brown made
halting replies, his eyelids drooping with weariness.  He told of
<i>Charybdis'</i> slow progress through the Carolines and
Marshalls, and steady course eastwards across the Pacific.  No,
he did not know of any other English ship near.  He had
heard nothing of any concentration against the German
squadron.  It was at this point that the Captain called upon
the Sub-Lieutenant to interpret, and the Sub-Lieutenant
duly informed Brown in passionless tones that a prisoner
who made false statements was guilty of espionage, and as
such was liable to be shot, and undoubtedly in this instance
would be shot.
</p>

<p>
'Yes,' said Brown.
</p>

<p>
'Was <i>Charybdis</i> expecting to encounter <i>Ziethen</i>?'
</p>

<p>
'I don't know,' said Brown.
</p>

<p>
'What was her course and destination at the time of
meeting?'
</p>

<p>
'I don't know,' said Brown.
</p>

<p>
'Now, did he want to be well treated while he was on
board?'
</p>

<p>
'Yes,' said Brown.
</p>

<p>
Then let him answer their questions sensibly.  Whither
was <i>Charybdis</i> bound?'
</p>

<p>
'I don't know,' said Brown, and at this point the medical
officer intervened, and Captain Lutz left him testily.  Brown
had been speaking the truth when he said he did not know;
but he had a very shrewd idea all the same, and had he told
Captain Lutz of his suspicions he might have relieved that
officer of a great burden of worry.  But that was no way
Brown's business&mdash;on the contrary.  Captain Lutz's
ill-timed threat had reminded him of the fact at the very
moment when, in his half-dazed condition, he was likely in
reply to kindly questioning to have told all he knew or
thought.
</p>

<p>
The Surgeon spoke to the sick-bay steward, who
summoned a colleague, and between them they tucked Brown
into a cot in the sick-bay, put a hot bottle at his feet (shock
had left him cold and weak) and allowed him to fall away
into that deep, intense sleep for which his every fibre
seemed to be clamouring.  And while Brown slept <i>Ziethen</i>
came round on her heel and headed back eastwards.
</p>

<p>
For <i>Charybdis</i> had not gone to the bottom quite without
exacting some compensation.  One of her 4.7-inch shells
had struck <i>Ziethen</i> fair and true a foot above the
waterline, and a yard forward of the limits of her armour belt.
There the shell had burst, smashing a great hole through
which the sea raced in such a volume that the pumps were
hard put to it to keep the water from gaining until, after the
battle, a sweating work party had got a collision mat over
the hole, while inside the stokers cleared the bunker, into
which the hole opened, of the coal which interfered with the
work of the pumps.  Examination of the damage showed it
to be extensive.  Nowhere else on all the side of the ship
could a shell of that calibre have been put to better use.  The
forward armour plate, starboard side, was slightly buckled
and loose on its rivets; there was a hole in the skin ten feet
across, one-third of it below water, and, worst of all, the
bulkhead and watertight door between the injured compartment
and the next (the boiler compartment, and largest of
all) were involved in the damage as well.  The ship was
actually in danger; in smooth water she had nothing to fear,
but, given a Pacific gale and Pacific rollers, the collision mat
inevitably torn off, and the pumps choked with coal-dust,
two compartments might fill and <i>Ziethen</i> would go to join
<i>Charybdis</i> on the bottom.
</p>

<p>
Clearly it meant the postponement of <i>Ziethen's</i> projected
raid.  The New Zealand meat ships and the Australian
convoys would be left in peace for the time.  No captain would
risk his ship on a long voyage in such a condition, least of
all the captain of a German warship with no friends within
five thousand miles, with the constant possibility of a battle
at any moment, and the certainty of one sooner or later.
<i>Ziethen</i> must find a harbour, a haven of some sort, where
she could rest while her shattered hull was being patched,
and that without delay.  A neutral port would mean almost
certain internment, the most ignominious ending possible
to a voyage; or if by any miracle she was not interned, her
presence would be broadcast far and wide, and on her exit
from neutral waters she would find awaiting her an
overwhelming force of the enemy.  So that ports with docks and
stores and necessaries were barred to her.  She must find
somewhere a deserted piece of land from which news would
not spread, where she would be able to find shelter while
her own artificers forged and fixed new plates, and where it
was unlikely that enemy warships would find her or
inquisitive Government officials complain of breaches of
neutrality.  In the Pacific there was more than one such
haven, but the nearest was far superior to all others;
Captain Lutz knew the answer to the question he set himself
before even he had found it by consultation of charts and
sailing directions.  Resolution Island, that last, most
northerly outlier of the Galapagos Archipelago, would suit
him best of all.  So <i>Ziethen</i> set her course for Resolution
Island, a thousand miles away, her pumps at work, while a
relay of sweating artificers down in the Stygian depths of
her toiled to keep them clear.  Brown slept the heavy,
exhausting sleep of profound shock the while <i>Ziethen's</i>
propellers beat their monotonous rhythm, driving her
onwards to where Brown's fate awaited him.
</p>

<p>
He slept all the rest of the day and most of the night.
And though he had the sailor's habit of sound sleep and the
readiness of sleep of the strong-minded, towards morning
he was wakened more than once by a painful, unexplainable
noise, a bubbling howl which in his sleepy condition
appeared to him to be neither human nor connected with
the ship.  It died away each time, however, and he slept
again, but in the morning, when he was fully awake, he
heard it again.  It seemed to come from the other side of the
bulkhead, and he could not explain it to himself.  He looked
about him; he was alone, although there was another
empty cot in the cabin.  The interior was a cool white, and
a whirling electric fan helped out the portholes in their
business of ventilation, but the air which came in hardly
seemed to cool the cabin.  For <i>Ziethen</i> was almost on the
Equator, and iron decks and iron bulkheads mean a
sweltering heat under a vertical sun.  The heat was dry and
redolent of hot metal, but Brown was used to it; two years
on the lower deck in the tropics had made such a state of
affairs almost normal to him.
</p>

<p>
Brown had not much time to think before the sick-bay
steward he remembered from yesterday entered the cabin.
His jolly German face creased into a smile as he saw Brown
normal and conscious again.  He put a thermometer into
Brown's mouth, and smiled again as he read it and noted
the result on the chart at the head of the cot.  He spoke to
him amicably, and grinned as he realized that Brown did
not understand a word he said.  He made Brown comfortable
as dexterously as a nurse might, twitched the blankets
into place and smoothed the bedclothes and waddled away
with a friendly look over his shoulder.  Ten minutes later he
returned with the Surgeon.
</p>

<p>
'Bedder, eh?' said that officer with a glance at the chart.
Automatically he took Brown's wrist and produced his
watch simultaneously, felt his pulse and nodded.
</p>

<p>
'Any bain any blace?' he asked.
</p>

<p>
'No, sir,' said Brown.
</p>

<p>
'Feeling all right, eh?'
</p>

<p>
'Yes, sir.'
</p>

<p>
'You can haf breagfast, den.'
</p>

<p>
The Surgeon spoke to the steward, who vanished and
returned almost at once.  He brought good grey bread and
tinned butter, and coffee which was not as good as either;
but Brown relished it all.  As the Surgeon retired the
steward brought him a bundle of clothes&mdash;shirt and jumper
and loose trousers, and socks and shoes; they were the
white duck uniform of a German sailor, and Brown put
them on, a little troubled by the minor differences between
it and the English naval uniform&mdash;the collar, for example,
had to be buttoned awkwardly inside&mdash;but the general fit
was not too bad.  The plump steward still grinned in
elephantine friendliness.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the morning passed.  The Commander, cold-eyed
and detached, came in on a round of inspection, ran
his eye over him and went his way without a word.  Then he
was led once more into the presence of the Captain and
searchingly questioned.  Brown did his best not to give
information; he fell back when hard-pressed upon a stolid,
brainless stupidity, and the most penetrating questions
rattled harmlessly from his 'I don't knows.'  And since it
was extremely probable that a mere leading seaman from
an isolated cruiser should know nothing, the Captain in the
end dropped the inquisition.  And, after all, it is doubtful if
anything Brown could have told him would have added to
Captain von Lutz's information.  The Captain was about to
dismiss him when the Sub-Lieutenant interposed with a
respectful question.  The Captain thought for a moment,
exchanged a few sentences with the Sub-Lieutenant, and
uttered his verdict.  It was verdict settling Brown's
fate&mdash;and the fate of <i>Ziethen</i> too, but no one was to know that.
</p>

<p>
Brown heard of the decision on his return to the sick-bay.
</p>

<p>
'You are to helb here,' said the Surgeon to him.
</p>

<p>
Brown could only stare without understanding, and the
Surgeon (with enormous condescension on the part of an
officer towards a man in ordinary seaman's uniform)
explained in a fatherly manner.
</p>

<p>
'What are we to do wit you on board here?' he asked.
'Pud you in prison?  Prison is not good in the dropigs.  You
gan ztay and helb nurse your vrients.  You will not run
away, we know.'
</p>

<p>
And he laughed throatily; Brown did not realize how
exceedingly condescending it was on the part even of a
non-combatant German officer to crack a joke with a
seaman.
</p>

<p>
It was thus that Brown learned the explanation of the
groaning noise of the night before.  The plump steward led
him into the adjoining ward of the sick-bay.  There on two
cots lay two wrecks of men.  One had his head half swathed
in bandages, through which once more a red stain was
beginning to show.  He lay on his back in the cot with his
fingers writhing, and through a shapeless hole in the
bandages over his mouth there came a continued low,
bubbling groan&mdash;low now, but clearly likely to rise at any
moment to that higher penetrating pitch Brown remembered
so well.  Half a forehead and one eye remained
uncovered to show Brown that beneath the bandages lay
what had once been the homely, friendly features of Ginger
Harris, a messmate of his and a bosom friend of two years'
standing.  There was no hint of recognition in that one eye
of Ginger's when it opened; all Ginger's thoughts were at
present concentrated upon himself.  Later, when Brown
saw what was beneath the bandages, he was not surprised.
</p>

<p>
The second cot was occupied by a leading signalman
whom Brown did not know at all well, and he hardly
recognized him because of the marble-like pallor which had
overspread his face; he was so thin and so exceedingly pale&mdash;even
his lips were white&mdash;that he was more like a soulless
visitor from another world as he lay motionless in the cot.
Brown wondered what was the injury from which he was
suffering, and looked inquiringly at the fat steward.  The
latter soon enlightened him; he indicated a bulge beneath
the bedclothes, whirled his arms round like a windmill,
said 'Sh-sh,' and tapped his leg.  Brown gasped his meaning;
the leading signalman had come within reach of one of
<i>Charybdis'</i> gigantic propellers as she sank and had lost his
leg.  Perhaps he had been lucky in that the whirling blades
had not cut him to mincemeat instead of merely hacking off
a limb, but Brown realized that there could be two opinions
about that.
</p>

<p>
So that he and these two wrecks were the sole survivors
of the four hundred and odd men who had constituted the
crew of <i>Charybdis</i>.  Four hundred dead men were drifting in
the middle depths of the Pacific, a prey for the shark and the
squid.  It had been a vain, frantic sacrifice, part of the price
the Navy must pay for the glory of keeping the bellies of an
unthinking population charged with their accustomed meat
and bread.  Brown could picture, back in England, the
arrival of the news of the loss of <i>Charybdis</i> with all hands.
The tea-parties would say, 'Dear me, how sad!' and go on
talking about cancer of the womb; and the business offices
would say, 'Mismanagement somewhere, of course,' and
revert to the Cesarewitch or the delinquencies of office
boys.  Brown had no illusions about that.  He knew how
little the people for whom he was fighting appreciated his
services and those of his fellows.  They might inflate
themselves with pride over having the largest Navy in the world,
and sing little songs about 'Britannia, the Pride of the
Ocean,' and stand a bluejacket a drink, and the better read
might talk hazily about 'the command of the sea'; but of
the irresistible strength of sea power, of the profundity of
study and research and self-sacrifice necessary to employ
it&mdash;or of what lay beneath Ginger Harris's bandages&mdash;they
knew nothing.  Brown's upper lip rose a little, and his blunt
chin came forward at the same time.  None of that affected
his determination to do his duty; his duty to the Navy to
himself and (although he would not think of it in those
words) to the memory of his mother.  He would help feed
the babbling mob of civilians, if he could, but not for the
civilians' sake.
</p>

<p>
Later he found himself jeering bitterly at himself for his
highfalutin determinations.  He was a prisoner in the hands
of the enemy, and helpless.  He could think of no means to
hold back <i>Ziethen</i> from her mission of destruction.  As soon
as her side was repaired she would go off capturing and
sinking British ships, just as <i>Emden</i> was doing.  Five million
pounds was a small estimate of the cost of her probable
sinkings.  And he would be forced to witness them&mdash;or else,
with contemptuous carelessness, he might be put on board
a neutral vessel to find his way home while <i>Ziethen</i>
continued her career.  There was nothing he could do.  He knew
too much about the internal discipline of a ship to hope to
disable the engines or bring off any other boy's adventure
book coup, although it must be admitted that he tried to
think of some scheme to achieve some such end.  Helplessness
and despair and loneliness combined to force him
into frightful despondency&mdash;the utter black misery of the
twenty-year-old&mdash;during the three days that <i>Ziethen</i> was
ploughing her crippled way to Resolution.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XII</i>
</h3>

<p>
The Galapagos Archipelago is a group of volcanic
islands, bisected by the Equator, seven hundred miles from
the American coast.  They support no inhabitants&mdash;mainly
because they have little water&mdash;and they are sufficiently
distant from the ordinary trade routes (at least until the
opening of the Panama Canal) to have remained comparatively
unvisited.  Their flora and fauna have followed their
own lines of evolution without interference from the mainland,
so that they boast their own special species of insects
and reptiles and cacti.  The monstrous Galapagos tortoises
gave the Archipelago its collective name, but the individual
islands were christened by the Englishmen who called there
on sundry occasions&mdash;Albemarle, Indefatigable, Chatham,
Barrington, Resolution and the rest are all reminiscent
of ships or admirals or statesmen.  Hither came Woodes,
Rogers and Dampier, privateering, and Anson with King
George's commission.  The Pacific whalers&mdash;Hermann
Melville among them&mdash;called to stock their ships with
tortoises.  H.M.S. <i>Beagle</i> came here a hundred years ago with
a young naturalist of an inquiring turn of mind on board,
by name Charles Darwin, who was so struck by the
evidences of evolution among the living creatures there that
his thoughts were directed to the consideration of the
Origin of Species by Natural Selection.
</p>

<p>
Resolution Island is the loneliest and least visited of them
all.  Once it was a volcanic crater, but it has been extinct for
a thousand years or more, and the Pacific has broken in at
one point so that in shape it is an incomplete ring of
towering cliffs surrounding a central lagoon half a mile across.
The entrance gives twenty fathoms of water; the centre of
the lagoon is of unplumbed depth.  The cliffs themselves
(the ring is nowhere more than a quarter of a mile thick)
are of lava in huge tumbled jagged blocks with edges like
knives, the lower slopes covered thinly with spiky cactus, the
upper slopes a naked tangle of rock.  The extreme highest
ridge, however, where the wind had full play, has been
somewhat weathered down, so that the lava edges have been
blunted, and are disguised, by a layer of smaller pumice.
</p>

<p>
One glimpse of that central lagoon convinced Captain
von Lutz that here indeed was the haven he desired.  It was
a land-locked harbour which would give shelter in any
wind that blew, and already in his mind's eye he could see
<i>Ziethen's</i> side repaired and the ship herself free to traverse
the Pacific and wreak confusion and destruction among the
helpless British mercantile marine.  Cautiously he made his
entrance, for the sailing directions are excessively vague
regarding Resolution.  He sent a picket boat on ahead, and
followed her cautiously, sounding as he went.  <i>Ziethen</i>
breasted gallantly the race of the tide through the gap (for
at the ebb the piled-up water in the lagoon comes surging
out through the narrow exit like a mill-race) made her way
through with the naked cliffs close on either hand and
emerged safely into the lagoon.  As she entered the stifling
heat of the place closed in upon her with crushing force,
for the cliffs cut off the wind and the sun beats down all day
upon their sloping surfaces and is pitilessly reflected
inwards to a central focus.  But heat must be endured;
cautiously and very, very slowly <i>Ziethen</i> swung sideways.
An anchor roared from her hawsehole and took grip of the
bottom away from the vast depths of the central throat
of the old crater.  Tide and propellers and rudder were
balanced against each other while another anchor was got
away from the stern, and soon <i>Ziethen</i> was riding safely
and comfortably in the heart of Resolution.  It was a sound
piece of seamanship, which Brown thoroughly appreciated,
despite the fact that his view of the proceedings was limited
to what he could see from portholes.
</p>

<p>
And as soon as mooring was completed, <i>Ziethen's</i> crew
sprang into furious action.  Alone on a sea where every
man's hand was against them, it was dangerous to linger
within sight of land however deserted.  The work must be
done at once, so that <i>Ziethen</i> could emerge from her
concealment, with sea room to fight if necessary, and her
injured side healed, so that she could fight or run or capture
as occasion dictated.  The stokers were set to work clearing
the starboard bunkers as far as might be and transferring
their contents to the port side.  The Gunnery Lieutenant
supervised the activity of a party which laboured to empty
the starboard magazines and fill the port ones.  Even the
starboard battery twelve-pounders were unshipped, with
infinite labour, and taken across, and the central guns were
trained out to port.  For a modern ship in fighting trim is
not so easy to careen as were the tiny wooden ships of the
buccaneers.  To expose a foot of the ship's bottom necessitates
the transference of hundreds of tons of weight&mdash;and
even that is a dangerous and chancy matter in a ship whose
sides are plastered with armour plate.  Small wonder that
<i>Ziethen</i> needed the shelter of Resolution for the business.
</p>

<p>
All this dawned upon Brown as he looked round him
during the dog watches that evening when he was allowed
upon deck under the friendly chaperonage of the fat
steward.  He looked up at the towering cliffs, and felt the
increasing heel of the deck.  If those cliffs were in the
possession of an enemy with a gun&mdash;a six-inch&mdash;a twelve-pounder
even!  <i>Ziethen</i>, heavily listed, would be helpless.  Her
decks could be swept, the repairing party overside could
be wiped out, and the mending of the side could be
postponed indefinitely, until either the ship was sunk or she
remedied her list again and cleared off in disgust to some
new refuge; and refuges as good as Resolution were
necessarily few.  He scanned the desolate cliff again, warily.
They were barely more than a quarter of a mile away at
any point, within easy rifle-shot, in fact.  Rifle-shot!  An
idea sprang into pulsing life in Brown's brain, and the
blood surged hot beneath his skin.  He turned away from
the fat steward lest he should betray his sudden agitation.
But again and again he peered up at the cliffs, turning over
in his mind the details of his plan, searching for flaws in it
and debating consequences.  He could find no flaws; he
could foresee possibly profound consequences.
</p>

<p>
Back in the sick-bay, alone, waiting to hear the feeble cry
of the Leading Signalman or the renewed sound of Ginger
Harris's agony, he plunged more seriously into his plans.  If
he could delay <i>Ziethen's</i> repairs for a time, or if (as he
hardly hoped) he could drive her away unrepaired, he
would have achieved much.  Somewhere, of course, British
ships were seeking her out, and the longer she could be kept
in one spot the more chance they would have of finding her.
The news of the sinking of <i>Charybdis</i> must have brought
many ships hot upon the trail.  (Brown did not know that
<i>Charybdis'</i> wireless messages never got through, and the
loss of <i>Charybdis</i> was at long last ascribed to internal
causes, the same as accounted for <i>Bulwark</i> and other
ships.)  To hold <i>Ziethen</i> helpless for a few days might well
settle the matter.  It might cost him his life, but that was a
price he expected to pay.  Nelson and Blake and Drake had
given their lives in other wars.  And although a slight tremor
ran through him at the thought of dying&mdash;death comes
hard at twenty&mdash;it did not affect his determination at all, or
weigh in the balance of his plans.  Agatha Brown's influence
was bearing its fruit, and perhaps his heritage on the male
side from a long line of fighting naval ancestors had
something to say in the matter too.
</p>

<p>
Brown's escape from <i>Ziethen</i> was absurdly simple.  This
of course was largely because he was not expected to want
to escape&mdash;who on earth would desire to be marooned on
a barren and waterless island?&mdash;and partly because at first
sight it seemed as if his escape would be a relief for
<i>Ziethen</i>.  Prisoners of war are out of place on a raiding
cruiser; to hold them safely means treating them harshly,
and no one on board had the least desire to treat Brown
harshly.  Yet he was definitely in the way where he was,
save for the fact that he was of some slight assistance in
the nursing of the two English wounded men.  He was a bit
of grit in the machinery of <i>Ziethen</i>&mdash;slight, but noticeable.
</p>

<p>
Now at the foot of the gangway outside the sick-bay
stood an arms rack.  In the rack stood twelve rifles, and
above them hung twelve sets of equipment.  For <i>Ziethen</i>
was a raiding cruiser, and must be ready at a moment's
notice to send away an armed boarding or landing party.
The rifles and equipment stood ready for the use of one
of the boats' crews.  Brown had noted them casually more
than once, but now he opened the door and stole out
gently to examine them more closely.  The rifles were
heavily greased, as was necessary in the tropics.  The
equipments were in marching order, ready for instant use.  He
felt the pouches; they were full&mdash;sixty rounds per set.  The
leather pouches at the back of each belt contained two
heavy packages&mdash;a day's emergency ration in each.  The
water-bottles were empty, however.  Brown removed two,
tiptoed back and filled them, and drove the corks well
home.  Inside the door he listened carefully, heard no one
coming, and slipped out again.  He replaced one water-bottle
in its sling and buckled the other to the belt of the
same set of equipment.  He emptied the pouches of another
set and filled his pockets with the ammunition.  He put
another day's rations into the pouch of the set he proposed
taking with him, and his preparations were complete.  If,
with two days' food and water and one hundred and
twenty rounds, he could not keep <i>Ziethen</i> thoroughly
annoyed for a week he would be very surprised.
</p>

<p>
But to be ready to depart was one thing; to transfer
himself and his captures to the mainland of Resolution was
quite another.  Brown realized how easily his plan might
fail at this point, and how discovery would mean an
ignominious marching off to the punishment cells and the
end of all his hopes.  That was a risk that had to be faced,
however.  He had weighed the chances and had decided he
might perhaps succeed.  All that was necessary, in fact, was
a cool head and moderate good fortune.  It would be a
distortion of English to say that Brown had a cool head; at
the moment he was a mere incarnation of duty, selfless and
unselfish and impersonal, so that coolness of head had
nothing to do with his condition.  He was a fighting
machine, and as little likely to become flustered as any
other machine.
</p>

<p>
Outside it was tropically dark; the young moon had not
quite cleared the highest ridge of Resolution, to light the
lagoon and the ship within.  Brown lifted the full set of
equipment, put it over his shoulders, and buckled it about
him.  He took a rifle, slung it on one shoulder, and stole up
the gangway.  In five seconds he was crouched beneath
the port side boat swung in its davits, unobserved by the
watch, by the armed sentry, or by any casual wanderers.
With noiseless unfumbling rapidity he set about his
preparations for the next step.
</p>

<p>
With his knife he cut the lashings of the boat cover,
reached inside and pulled out, after a small search, two of
the lifebelts which were there in readiness.  One of them he
bound about his rifle as tightly as he could; it would be a
sorry fiasco if the weapon were to sink and he were to
arrive on Resolution safe but unarmed.  The other he bound
about him.  Then he fished out one of the boat's lines and
dropped the end very, very quietly overside.  Slinging his
rifle again, he gripped the rope and lowered himself down.
He was hampered by the bulkiness of the lifebelt and the
mass of his equipment, but patience and brute strength
saved him from swinging with a crash against the steel side
of the ship; he went down foot by foot, cautiously.  At last
he felt the sea at his ankles, and by the time he had reached
the end of the rope it was at his waist.  He let himself fall
the rest of the way, sinking until the water closed over his
head in his effort to avoid a splash before the lifebelt
brought him to the surface again.  The rest was easy.
Lying as much on his back as the lifebelt would allow, and
clinging like grim death to his rifle, he struck out gently
with his feet along the ship's side; the water was as warm as
milk.  Heading steadily and patiently past <i>Ziethen's</i> stern
he moved away by almost imperceptible degrees.  It was
half an hour before his slow, powerful strokes bore him to
the side of the lagoon, and he had to swim along the side
for another ten minutes before he could discover, in the
faint light of the rising moon, a bit of beach which shelved
sufficiently to allow him to clamber up.  There he
unfastened the lifebelts and dropped them in a cactus clump,
and hitching his equipment more firmly round his wet
body he set his face in the darkness towards the steep,
horribly tangled slope before him.
</p>

<p>
Brown knew nothing of the Galapagos Islands&mdash;truth to
tell, he did not know that he was on one of them&mdash;and he
was hardly expecting the appalling effort which the climb
demanded.  The island was only a mass of lava blocks
welded together, overgrown with cactus; to make a yard's
progress involved hauling oneself up a six-foot block
guarded with razor edges, tearing through spiky cactus at
the same time.  In a very short time his hands and feet were
raw, his clothes were in rags, blood was running from his
scratches, and he was streaming with sweat in consequence
of his violent exertion in that stifling atmosphere.  After
fifty yards of progress body and mind were numb with
fatigue, but he still toiled on, the perfect fighting machine
with duty as its motive power.  One stray thought came
through his dull mind and cheered him during that desperate
struggle; that was that if his progress was so slow that of a
landing party would be equally so, and with his rifle in a
point of vantage he would be able to hold any number of
men back.  So, fumbling forward, gasping with fatigue,
finding handhold and foothold in the dark, heaving himself
up with gigantic efforts, occasionally lowering himself
cautiously at breaks in the slope, he forced his way to the
top, and there, on a projecting knuckle of rock which his
instinct told him would be an advantageous strategic position,
he lay down to wait until dawn, his rifle at his side.
Instant sleep, the sleep of overstrain, closed over him as he
lay, face downwards with his head on his arms.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XIII</i>
</h3>

<p>
But while Brown was crawling up the steep side of Resolution,
and while he was asleep on the projecting saddle of
rock, many things had happened.  Tremendous news had
reached <i>Ziethen</i> from the wireless stations on the American
mainland; the whole ether of the Eastern Pacific had been
in a chattering turmoil, for von Spee had struck his first
blow upon the ring of enemies which had closed in upon
him.  Admiral Sir Christopher Cradock had encountered
him, with two weak armoured cruisers against two powerful
ones.  He could have refused battle; he could have fallen
back on a slow battleship which was wallowing along after
him two hundred miles away, but he had refused to lose
touch with an enemy who had already proved so elusive.
He had gone boldly into action, hoping to do von Spee
enough damage to cripple him, but he had not been so
fortunate as had been <i>Charybdis</i> in her battle with <i>Ziethen</i>.
<i>Good Hope</i> and <i>Monmouth</i> had sunk with all hands under
the guns of <i>Scharnhorst</i> and <i>Gneisenau</i>, and von Spee was
now for a brief space master of all the Southern Pacific
coast.  The nitrate ships, vital to the manufacture of British
explosives, were cowering in Chile ports while von Spee,
with all the prestige of victory, was lording it down the
coast and an exasperated Admiralty in London was
hurriedly searching for the wherewithal to close the gap
which von Spee had hewn in the ring they had flung round
him.  In the last desperate matter of national life or death
von Spee's victory was unimportant&mdash;what were two
obsolete armoured cruisers to a Navy which could put
thirty Dreadnoughts into line?&mdash;but to the life of a Cabinet
it was supremely important.  With <i>Emden</i> still loose in the
Indian Ocean sinking ships every day, with <i>Ziethen's</i>
whereabouts unknown, so that at any moment a fresh
series of depredations might clamour for public attention,
and with von Spee triumphant in the Pacific, the Cabinet's
prestige might well be so shaken as to ensure its fall; and
the results of such an overturn were incalculable.  Well was
it, indeed, that <i>Ziethen</i> in her damaged condition had not
dared to let loose her wireless and announce the destruction
of <i>Charybdis</i>.  Once let her repair herself so that she could
move about and evade pursuit, and she would be emboldened
to proclaim her victory; the streets of London
would be full of posters: 'Another Naval Disaster in the
Pacific,' and the Cabinet might come crashing down.  That
is what Captain von Lutz realized as he read the stream of
wireless messages, and it was visualizations of this sort
which fired him with impatience as he supervised the
heeling of the ship and hastened below to inspect the
achievements of the ship's smith and artificers who were preparing
the plates which were to close the yawning hole in <i>Ziethen's</i>
side.  Not a moment was to be lost, although in all
conscience Kapitan zur See von Lutz could see no cause for
delay.  Twelve hours from dawn would see those plates in
position, <i>Ziethen</i> out once more in the Pacific, blazoning
the destruction of <i>Charybdis</i> to all the world, and privately
informing the German secret agent in Peru of her need
for coal and of the rendezvous whither a collier should be
sent.
</p>

<p>
Even the news that the captured English sailor had
escaped and taken a rifle with him did not disturb Captain
von Lutz's state of pleased anticipation; the escape of the
sailor could do no harm&mdash;von Lutz wondered why the
sailor had bothered to arm himself seeing that they would
not trouble to pursue him&mdash;and the Captain contented
himself with putting into prison the kindly sick-bay steward
and the marine sentry of the upper deck, for purely
disciplinary reasons.
</p>

<p>
Brown awoke when dawn was rushing into the sky.  He
was very sore and tired and thirsty; but he gratified his
thirst only to the extent of two swallows from his water-bottle.
He looked to his rifle.  As he had hoped, the thick
grease with which it had been smeared had kept the water
from the metal, and no trace of rust appeared on it or in it.
He opened the chamber of the butt, extracted oil-bottle and
pull-through, and cleaned the barrel ready for action.  He
had never before handled a Mauser rifle, but the supreme
simplicity of the breech mechanism and sighting arrangements
held no secrets for him.  He filled the magazine and
lay ready for action.
</p>

<p>
Below him, a scant quarter of a mile away, the <i>Ziethen</i>
lay immobile nearly at the centre of the lagoon.  The water
round her was smooth, glassy, save for the strong ripple
which Brown's powerful eyesight could detect about her
stern and her anchor chains when the rapid tide swirled
round them.  She lay like a ship of the dead; even from her
funnels there came only a shimmering hint of internal
activity.
</p>

<p>
Yet as the light improved Brown could see white-clad
figures on her deck and upper works, and he fingered his
rifle, sighting on them each in turn, while refraining from
pulling the trigger.  He wanted every cartridge for more
important work than casual killings.  Later the white flag
with the black cross soared upwards; the day was officially
begun on board <i>Ziethen</i>.  Immediately afterwards there was
a stir of activity on the starboard side, and Brown's keen
eyesight could see that the work he was expecting had
begun.  Two bo'sun's chairs were lowered down the side,
one to each extremity of the hole made by <i>Charybdis'</i> shell,
and a couple of white-clad figures scrambled down Jacob's
ladders on to each of them.  The damaged plates were to be
unriveted and removed the while the new ones were preparing.
Brown laid his rifle to his shoulder and his cheek
to the butt.
</p>

<p>
During the brief while he was taking aim there was time
for a myriad thoughts.  If he did not press the trigger he
would be left unpursued; <i>Ziethen</i> would effect her repairs
and clear from Resolution, and he would remain, a free
man, to take his chance of being picked up by a passing
ship to serve his country again.  Once let him fire and kill
one of <i>Ziethen's</i> crew, and all the hundreds of German
sailors on board would become his sworn enemies, and
might hound him down to his death.  Death lay on the one
hand, and liberty on the other; it was a momentous choice
and one over which Brown might have hesitated.  He did
not hesitate at all; he did not even think about the choice.
He had made up his mind last night, and when a man like
Brown makes up his mind there is no room left for
hesitation.
</p>

<p>
Slowly the sights came into line.  Through the U of the
backsight could be seen a tiny triangle of white&mdash;the white
of the jumper of the man on the bo'sun's chair.  Up into
the U crept the wedge of the foresight; it moved steadily
upward until its tip was exactly in line with the top of the
U.  There it stayed for a tiny instant of time, the while
Brown, mindful of his musketry training at Harwich, and
his periodical practices since, steadied his breathing, took
the first pull of the trigger, and slowly squeezed the trigger
back further through the final tenth of an inch.  Then the
rifle went off, and the echo of its report ran menacingly
round the circle of the cliffs.
</p>

<p>
Maschinistmaat Zimmer had set cheerfully about his
task of drilling out the rivets about the broken plate.  He
whistled to himself as he adjusted his tools, and he even
cracked a joke or two with the three other men swinging
beside him in the bo'sun's chairs.  Tools and machinery had
ever been a joy to him, and the prospect of using them,
even after all this time, still cheered him up.  He had no
thought for his native Hamburg, nor even for the pretty
young blonde wife whom he had not seen for eighteen
months.  He applied himself without a thought or a care to
the work in hand.  Then something hit him hard on the left
side close to his heart, and for an instant of time he knew
pain, agonizing pain, before darkness shut in upon him.  He
was dead as his knees gave way under him and he fell back
over the rail of the chair; his feet caught under the lower
rail, and he hung head downwards, grotesquely inert.  A
bright splash on the plate where he had been working
showed where the bullet which had passed through him had
flattened.  There was another widow now in Hamburg.
</p>

<p>
But no one at all paid any attention at that time to the
dead body of Maschinistmaat Zimmer hanging by its knees,
and certainly no one thought at all about his widow.
Leading Seaman Brown saw him fall, snicked the bolt of the
Mauser out and in, aimed again coolly and rapidly, and
fired.  The other man on Zimmer's bo'sun's chair fell dead
even as he looked round to see what had happened to
Zimmer; one man on the other chair died as he turned to
see whence came the firing; the fourth man crumpled up
as, panic-stricken, he sprang towards the Jacob's ladder to
safety.
</p>

<p>
Brown fired three more shots into the groups of men who
swarmed to the side of the ship on the upper deck out of
curiosity; they took effect, and in a few seconds the upper
deck was deserted as far as Brown could see.  <i>Ziethen</i>
swung idly at her anchors, grey and grim, with her big guns
peering dumbly forth.  At her side, absurdly small, the
white corpse of Maschinistmaat Zimmer dangled head
downward, and above him lay two white splotches which
were the bodies of his mates.  The fourth man had fallen
into the sea.
</p>

<p>
It was an apt picture of the simultaneous power and
helplessness of modern machinery.  On the one hand lay
<i>Ziethen</i>, with her ten 6-inch guns and her hundreds of crew
and her horse-power reckoned in thousands, and on the
other a lad of five foot eight, aged twenty, dominating her
and enforcing his will upon her.  But Brown was only
powerful in consequence of his rifle, the handiest, neatest,
most efficient piece of machinery ever devised by man.  Not
for the first time was the rifle altering the course of history.
Brown was not a marvellously good shot, but to hit four
men with four shots at a quarter of a mile when they are
entirely exposed and conspicuous in white against a dark
background does not call for marvellous shooting.  Brown
could handle his weapon in good workmanship fashion,
and that is all the rifle demands.  He had won the first trick,
and he snuggled down into his niche on the saddle of rock
to await the next development.  A head appeared beyond
<i>Ziethen's</i> foremost funnel, upon the bridge.  He fired
quickly, missed, and felt annoyed with himself.
</p>

<p>
On board the <i>Ziethen</i> there was annoyance at the
tiresome incident; it would have remained mere annoyance
save that five men had been killed.  Were it not for the fury
roused by the death of these men, messmates and friends,
the attitude of <i>Ziethen's</i> officers and men would have been
one of exasperated amusement&mdash;amusement that one man
should dare to pit himself against an armoured cruiser, and
exasperation at the delay to the repairing of the ship.  From
points of vantage&mdash;portholes, turret sighting slits&mdash;they
scanned the cliffs anxiously to obtain a glimpse of this
lunatic Englishman who was acting in so odd a manner.
Captain von Lutz, the angriest man on the ship, strode out
upon the bridge; but a bullet smacked against a stanchion
close at his ear and sang off into the distance.  Even Captain
von Lutz, one of the cleverest minds in the Imperial
German Navy, marked out for high command in the near
future, did not realize the difficulty of the task before him.
He gave abrupt orders to clear away the steam pinnace,
which had lain alongside since the night before, so that a
landing party could arrest this irritating fellow and bring
him on board to be dealt with.
</p>

<p>
Brown lay patiently in his niche.  Where he lay he could
command the stern and the whole starboard side of the
ship.  His rifle was pushed forward between two blocks of
lava which gave him almost perfect protection; the straggling
cactus was an efficient screen, and the bulge of the
saddle and the nick in its tip gave him command of most of
the face of the cliffs even where he lay.  He was perfectly
satisfied with his position; he saw that his magazine was
filled and submitted patiently to the scorching heat, which
was beginning to roast him slowly on his slab of naked
rock.
</p>

<p>
Suddenly the next development made itself apparent.
Round <i>Ziethen's</i> stern, shooting swiftly for the shore, came
her steam pinnace, with twenty men aboard her.  Brown's
rifle cracked out again and again, taking swift toll before
the men in her flung themselves down under shelter.  The
helmsman dropped, shot through the breast, but the officer
in command, the gold flashing on his white coat, grasped
the tiller and held her to her course as Brown's next bullet
tore the cap from his head.  Next second the boat was out of
sight under the steep drop of the bare rock at the water's
edge.  Brown recharged his magazine.
</p>

<p>
The lieutenant in command of the landing party realized,
in the instant that he grasped the helm, that this was not
going to be the simple arrest of a nearly helpless man which
he had anticipated.  It dawned upon him that a man with a
rifle a hundred yards away can take severe toll of a mass of
men rushing upon him.  There was a further lesson in addition
to this which he was to learn, but that was yet to come.
At present he made the arrangements which seemed
satisfactory to him.  He restrained the tendency of his men to
bundle out of the pinnace and rush wildly up the slope.
Under shelter of the steep bank he spread his men out over
the fifty yards of the bank's extent.  He saw that they had
their rifles loaded.  He got them all into position, and then
he gave the word for a simultaneous rush.
</p>

<p>
But here began the second lesson.  No one who had not
attempted it could realize that the word 'rush' had no place
in the vocabulary of Resolution.  The dreadful razor-edged
blocks of lava and the clustered clinging cacti made
anything like rapid progress impossible.  An active man could
move about on Resolution as fast as a snail in a garden,
as Brown had discovered the night before.
</p>

<p>
Brown, motionless in his cranny, saw appear below him
a line of men's heads at the water's edge, and he promptly
put a bullet through one of them.  The other heads
developed shoulders and bodies and legs and came towards
him, falling out of sight behind lava blocks, rising into full
view again as they struggled over, creeping up towards
him at an absurd, ridiculously slow pace.  He fired slowly
and deliberately, waiting for each shot until a man had
heaved himself up into full view.  A man's whole body at a
hundred yards makes a superb target.  Brown had fired six
shots and hit six men before the 'rush' died away.  No man
seeing his companions killed at each side of him could
bring himself to heave himself up and expose himself to
the next shot.  The dozen survivors stayed behind the cover
they chanced to have at hand, and lay without attempting
to make further upward progress.  They pushed their rifles
forward and began to fire up at the hidden death above
them.  The clatter and rattle of musketry began to resound
round the island, shattering its stillness.
</p>

<p>
Yet, despite the numerical odds against him, all the
advantages were still with Brown.  No one yet in the
attacking party had a clear knowledge of his hiding-place;
thanks to the two close blocks of lava and the cacti, he was
thoroughly hidden.  To an attacker all that might be in sight
was a rifle muzzle and two or three square inches of face in
deep shadow, and it would call for keener eyes, if unaided
by chance, than the human race possessed to detect that
much in the possible thousand square yards of rock and
cactus where he might be hidden.  Brown was not hampered
to any such extent.  He was higher up and could see farther
over the edges of the lava blocks.  He had more enemies to
shoot at, and those enemies occupied positions taken up by
chance in the heat of the moment.  He was cool and
unflurried by exertion.  He knew the line his enemies had
reached.
</p>

<p>
Bullets began to shriek overhead in the heated air, to
raise clouds of pumice-dust when they hit the rocks, or to
cut their way rustling through the fleshy cactus leaves.  Not
one came within ten yards of Brown.  Coolly, cold-bloodedly
even, he began to take toll of his attackers.  Here there
was a shoulder, there a leg, over there a head and shoulders
completely exposed.  He took deliberate aim and fired,
shifted his aim, fired again, slewed round carefully to avoid
any exposure of himself, and fired once more.  Each shot
echoed flatly round the cliff; in that heated air the noise of
the report was no guide whatever to the position of the
marksman.  Shot after shot went home.  Wounded men lay
groaning in hollows and crevices.  Dead men lay with their
faces on their rifles.  Very soon the few survivors dared not
fire back, but crouched down in the advantageous bits of
cover they chanced to be in, afraid to move lest this deadly
enemy should send a bullet winging to their hearts.  The
firing died away.  The lieutenant, mad with rage, leapt to
his feet to shout to his men, and received a bullet full in the
face which flung him over backward, a kicking, senseless
huddle of limbs upon a cluster of spiny cactus.  Then silence
descended again.  Brown blew gently down the breech of
his rifle barrel, peered through fierce, narrowed eyes for any
sign of his enemies, and resumed his patient, tense waiting,
eyes and ears alert for any sign of activity down the cliff,
where some rash enemy might be trying to creep
unobserved up to him, or along the base of the cliff to
outflank him.  For an hour nothing happened save for one
attempt on the part of an unfortunate to stretch his
cramped limbs, an attempt which secured him a bullet
through the knee which drained the life-blood out of him
in half an hour.
</p>

<p>
So that a duel of patience ensued between the watcher on
the cliff above and the dwindled half-dozen down below.
After the rude reports of the rifles the eternal stillness of
Resolution once more took possession.  The sun climbed
steadily upward, pouring down a stream of brassy heat
upon the tortured rocks.  The lagoon was of a vivid blue,
and in the centre of it <i>Ziethen</i> swayed idly at anchor.  As
the heat increased the objects on the island took on a
vaguely unreal appearance as the air above them
shimmered hazily.  Minutes dragged by like hours, but the
crouching living sailors at the base of the cliff dared make
no movement&mdash;not with the groans for help of their late
wounded companion still remembered in their ears.
</p>

<p>
Over on the <i>Ziethen</i> everyone was puzzled at what had
happened.  They had watched the landing; they had seen
men fall; they had heard the firing abruptly increase and
die away to nothing; but they could not explain the
sequence of events.  They could still see the pinnace against
the shore, and the boat guard sitting therein, but save for
three or four dead bodies they could see nothing of the
landing party, which was not surprising considering the
tangle of rocks and cactus into which it had fallen.  The
opinion on board suddenly crystallized that the attack must
have moved up into some gully unnoticeable from the ship,
driving its quarry before it.  At that rate the danger to
workers on the damage must have vanished.  Captain von
Lutz, on fire with impatience to have his ship ready for
action again, abruptly gave the order for a further party of
artificers to recommence work.
</p>

<p>
Brown, up on his shelf of rock, saw the white-clothed
figures, dwindled to the size of dolls, descend the Jacob's
ladders.  He gave them plenty of time; they sent up the
bodies of their predecessors to the upper deck by a rope
hoist, and then they began work.  As they began he opened
fire, and once again the echoes of his shots ran flatly round
the island.  The little white figures collapsed pitifully in the
bo'sun's chairs.  The sudden firing over their heads roused
the men crouching down the cliff, and they, wearied with
waiting and conscience-smitten about the non-fulfilment of
their duty, took up their rifles once again.  Someone down
there had at last formed a shrewd guess as to where Brown
was hidden, and as the rifles resumed their clatter bullet
after bullet began to hit the rocks near him.  One of them
even drove dust into his eyes.  Brown realized the danger.
He paid no attention at present to the other riflemen firing
at him, but, lying deadly still, peered this way and that
through the slit between his two blocks of lava for this one
keen-eyed or quick-witted enemy.  He saw him at last&mdash;part
of him, anyway.  A bit of white jumper and dark collar,
a hand and a cheek, deep in the shadow of a rock, and
beyond the rock another bit of white which was probably
the end of a trouser leg.  Their owner was still firing away
enthusiastically, and at each shot a bullet came buzzing
nearby, or smacked against cactus and rock to go off at a
new note.  Remorselessly Brown took his aim, sighting for
the edge of the collar against the white jumper.  At a
hundred yards he could not miss; as he pressed the trigger
he saw the jumper jerk, and his target rolled struggling into
view; some fair-haired boy, not so very unlike Brown himself,
striving ridiculously to hold together his shattered right
shoulder with his left hand, the blood pouring through his
fingers and his face distorted with pain.  Brown did not
think twice about it.  He turned his attention to the others,
whose bullets were ploughing into the cliff face twenty
yards on either side of him.  One of them he killed,
helplessly exposed to fire from above, and the fire of the others
ceased abruptly again as they crouched down in their
hollows.  Even as they did so Brown observed that the boat
guard, consumed with curiosity, was standing up trying to
see what was going on, and in doing so exposing his head
and shoulders over the rim of rock at the edge of the
lagoon.  Him Brown killed too, without mercy as without
rancour.
</p>

<p>
It was nearly noon by now.  Brown had delayed the
repairs of <i>Ziethen</i> for six hours already.  That in itself was a
vast achievement.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XIV</i>
</h3>

<p>
The next incident in the battle of Resolution was a tribute
to Brown's power&mdash;to the power of the rifle which lay hot
in his hand.  There was a flutter of white from <i>Ziethen's</i>
upper deck, a flutter of white long repeated.  Then two
figures climbed down the Jacob's ladders, and in one of
them, even at that distance, Brown could recognize the
rather portly form of the Surgeon who had condescended
to crack a joke with him.  Out of sheer rigidity of mental
pose Brown found himself pointing his rifle at him before
he remembered the white flag and desisted.  The new-comers
bent over the writhing figures on the bo'sun's chairs,
busied themselves with bandages and splints, and soon (but
every minute meant delay to <i>Ziethen</i>) the wounded men
were hoisted inboard and their attendants climbed up after
them.
</p>

<p>
And as they went there was a sudden commotion at the
foot of the cliff.  Someone there was too uncomfortable
where he was.  He could not bear the heat and the cramp
and the strain any longer.  Also he was the nearest to the
water's edge&mdash;having had the steepest bit of cliff to ascend
he had the easiest descent.  He flung himself suddenly, on all
fours, down a little precipice, rolled down another, crashed
through a cluster of cactus on which he left bits of his
clothes and of his skin, and tumbled over the last descent
to the water.  A bullet from Brown's rifle tore past his ear
as he did so, but in his flustered panic he never noticed it.
</p>

<p>
His example was infectious.  The other survivors of the
landing party rose simultaneously and flung themselves
down the cliff.  Brown smashed the spine of one of them as
he gathered himself for his last leap, but the other two
reached the water's edge&mdash;and safety&mdash;unhurt save for
gashes and scratches.  Three men now crouched in the
steam pinnace; they were the only unwounded survivors of
a landing party of twenty-one.
</p>

<p>
But to the puzzled, fuming officers on <i>Ziethen</i>, their
appearance by the pinnace meant relief from the worry of
guessing what had happened to the landing party.  The
bridge semaphore began a series of staccato gesticulations,
sending question after question to the dazed, conscience-stricken
trio crouching in the lee of the rock edge.  Sitting
with their feet in the water (for if they stood their signalling
hands came into Brown's view and within reach of his
bullets) they produced a couple of handkerchiefs and
signalled back&mdash;misspelt, badly signalled sentences went
limping back to the cruiser, where dozens of pairs of keen
eyes read off the halting words.  Happily most of the
questions asked could be answered in one word.
</p>

<p>
'Where is the rest of the party?'
</p>

<p>
'Dead.'
</p>

<p>
'Where is Lieutenant Stunner?'
</p>

<p>
'Dead.'
</p>

<p>
'How many men opposed you?'
</p>

<p>
'One.'
</p>

<p>
One question, however, the gesticulating semaphore
demanded again and again, and the bothered sailors'
blundering best constituted unsatisfactory replies.
</p>

<p>
'Where is the escaped prisoner?' demanded the semaphore
repeatedly, and the wretched men beside the pinnace
struggled vainly to satisfy their persistent captain.
</p>

<p>
'Up the cliff,' they signalled, and 'Hidden,' and 'We do
not know,' and 'In the same place as he was this morning,'
and similar hopeless answers which drove Captain Lutz
into a state of blind fury, which was not alleviated by the
knowledge that part of the crew was reading off the
answers and that the whole would know of them within
the hour.
</p>

<p>
Exasperated officers raked the face of the cliff with
powerful glasses, but there was no possible chance of their
finding Brown in that way.  The crew were furious with rage
at the killing of the landing party.  The last man shot by
Brown in the bo'sun's chair had been smitten through both
hips, and had lain shrieking with agony until the Surgeon
reached him&mdash;and every shriek had been heard by the men.
They were annoyed with their officers, and they thirsted,
one and all, for the blood of the man who had put this
shame upon their ship.  And von Lutz knew all about it, as
a good officer should.  This insolent runaway had undone
all the good effected by the victory over <i>Charybdis</i>, and
only his death would restore good feeling.  Von Lutz
appreciated the need of good feeling in a crew about to set
out on a voyage of half-senseless destruction with certain
defeat sooner or later at the end of it.  Besides, he must not
allow the men to stay idle.  Von Lutz had every possible
motive when he issued orders to prepare for a landing at
once of the largest party <i>Ziethen</i> could put on shore without
entirely crippling herself&mdash;two hundred men.  The news ran
round the lower deck to the accompaniment of a buzz of joy.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the work of repair must go on.  The Kapitan-Leutnant
received his orders from the Captain.  Some sort
of screen for the workers must be arranged, so that the men
at work on the injured plating could be hidden from the
view of the rifleman on the cliff.  A working party hurriedly
fell upon the task of preparing booms and awnings&mdash;further
delay for <i>Ziethen</i>.
</p>

<p>
Brown in his eyrie on the cliff might have found time
heavy on his hands were he not so wholly absorbed in the
possibility of the need for immediate action.  The sun was
slowly roasting him alive on the bare rock as though he
were on a grid-iron.  More than once he was forced to have
recourse to one of his two water-bottles, and it was a worse
torture to have to tear his lips away after a couple of
grudging mouthfuls than it was to bear the thirst which
preceded and followed them.  Already one bottle was
half empty, however, and Brown refused to allow himself
anything approaching indulgence in the warm, metal-flavoured
fluid.  He sternly thrust back the cork and buckled
the bottles to his belt.  Small beauty is there in war&mdash;no one
could find beauty in the tumbled bodies of the dead down
below or in the tortured wounded calling feebly for water
on the scorching rocks.  But beauty could be found in that
gesture of Brown's; one lone man&mdash;boy, rather&mdash;unwatched,
unordered, putting aside the drink he craved at
the call of what he considered his duty.  He set his small
white teeth while the sweat ran down his face and caked
the streaked lava dust which grimed it, his rifle ever to his
hand, suffering and enduring without regret or hesitation.
The suffering and self-sacrifice and uncomplaining heroism
which war has demanded, had they only been given to
causes which mankind deems ignobler, could in the million
years of man's existence have eliminated the need for
suffering anywhere within mankind's sphere of activity.
Brown, had this been pointed out to him, would not have
thought such an end worth achieving at any price&mdash;most
certainly not at the price demanded.
</p>

<p>
He took advantage of the lull to run the pull-through
down his rifle barrel again.  He looked with attention to the
breech mechanism, for the lava dust was a serious clog to
its smooth working.  He counted his cartridges and settled
them more handily in his pouches.  He thought about having
a meal, but put the idea aside; he was not at all hungry,
and excitement and the sun pouring down on to his back
between them were not Likely to allow him to be for some
time.  Still time dragged on.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile, bent over the meagre charts of Resolution
that were all any ship could boast, Captain von Lutz and
his officers were planning the attack upon Brown which
should put an end to the tiresome incident.  This time
nothing was to be left to chance.  There was to be no
repetition of the blunder of the morning, when too few men were
flung idly upon an impossible climb in the face of a weapon
of precision.  The campaign was mapped out with real
German thoroughness.  All men were to carry food and
water.  Each landing party was allotted a different section
of the island to beat through.  As the small-arm supplies
were limited, each party was carefully arranged in sections
of beaters and riflemen.  There was to be no taking of the
bull by the horns.  Brown's flanks were to be turned and he
was to be forced upon the move first before he was directly
attacked.  The riflemen in the tops were to continue their
watch for him&mdash;a bullet could travel from <i>Ziethen</i> to the
island as easily as from the island to <i>Ziethen</i>.  The hunt was
to be continued all night if necessary.  The capture or death
of the quarry was to be broadcast by a prearranged whistle
signal, whereupon the landing parties were to return
immediately to the boats.  All possible arrangements
seemed to have been made; the only flaw was that the men
who made the plans were still unaware of the difficulty of
movement upon the island.
</p>

<p>
Brown, idling away the weary minutes, became aware of
great activity on board <i>Ziethen</i>.  The semaphore messages
in German had of course been unreadable to him, and they
had been the last incident of note, having occurred two
hours ago.  Now men began to show themselves here and
there on the upper deck and boat deck.  They exposed
themselves no more than they could help, and Brown, firing
rapidly when opportunity occurred, kept them harried.  He
hit at least four men, who dropped upon the upper deck,
lying still or crawling away to shelter, and his shots were
answered from the ship by hidden riflemen&mdash;who, all the
same, had no knowledge of his exact position, and whose
efforts in consequence caused him little trouble.  A boom
suddenly was run out on the starboard side abaft the bridge
(Brown got in two shots into the little group he could see)
and from it dropped a long strip of awning which quite
screened the damaged area from his present position.  At
the same time another canvas screen was run up across the
upper deck at the stern, and despite the elevation of his
position he could not quite see over it.  He sent three bullets
through it, however, before he realized that this was a mere
waste of priceless ammunition.  The bridge semaphore
wig-wagged again hysterically, and the result of its message was
seen shortly, when the three wretched men in the steam
pinnace left their shelter under the rock and made a wild
dash back to the ship.  The pinnace steered an erratic
enough course, for the helmsman was lying flat on his back
under the gunwale in his desperate anxiety to avoid fire, but
all the same Brown could do her no harm and she soon shot
round <i>Ziethen's</i> stern out of sight into safety.  The sound
of bustle and activity even came across the lagoon to
Brown's ears, but the screens hid everything from view
save the ship's stern, upper works, and starboard side as far
as the outboard screen, and he could not form any accurate
idea of what was going on.  He soon knew, however.
</p>

<p>
Out from <i>Ziethen's</i> port bow, where they had been
manned out of his sight, shot four boats.  The steam pinnace
led, towing the other three, and they were all four crammed
with men.  A bubble of rifle-fire rose from <i>Ziethen</i> at the
same time and now a new menace was added&mdash;machine
guns.  Two of these raved at him from <i>Ziethen's</i> fore-top,
traversing slowly backward and forward across the suspected
area, at each new traverse taking a line lower down
the cliff.  Bullets were sending the dust flying everywhere;
the cactus was dropping here and there as the fleshy stems
were cut through.  Under that leaden hail Brown forced
himself to think clearly.  He could do little to stop those
boats&mdash;the death of a dozen men would not stop them&mdash;and
to fire he must expose himself a little in that deadly
horizontal rain.  It was not worth the risk.  Brown crouched
down into the hollow on the top of the saddle, behind the
twin lava blocks which had served their turn so well.  The
sharp rap of a bullet upon one of them and the sound of
others close above him made the propriety of the movement
apparent immediately after.  Then the hail passed on.
</p>

<p>
Brown, squirming round on his stomach, peered between
the blocks, could see nothing, and squirmed round further
to where he could see round them.  The string of boats,
instead of making straight for him, had dashed out through
the opening of the lagoon, and even as he caught sight of
them, had swung round to port, to his part of the island
but on the outside, the sea face.  His position was to be
taken in reverse.  It was then that Brown looked anxiously
at the sun; there were still three hours more of
daylight&mdash;only three hours, thank God.
</p>

<p>
The persistent beating of the machine-gun bullets started
a little avalanche of rock thirty yards away on the right, and
this disturbance attracted the attention of all the marksmen
on the ship; bullets rained upon the spot until a wide dust
cloud arose from it, drifting away on the hardly perceptible
wind.  Then the firing stopped; ammunition had been used
in prodigious quantities, and even small-arm ammunition
must not be allowed to run short on a raiding cruiser.  From
the ship came a rattle and buzz of machinery, and the
creaking of tackle.  Brown knew that the repairs were in
progress, and he knew too that it would be hard for him to
interfere for a while; it made him frown in anguish.  But
while his face of the cliff was being raked by a dozen
glasses, and while a score of marksmen, finger on trigger,
were waiting anxiously for any sign of movement, he dared
not make an open attempt to shift his position so as to be
able to fire round the screen.  Behind him, too, he knew that
men were being landed at the outer margin of the island;
soon they would be climbing up the outer face.  Then they
would reach the crest.  His saddle of rock was dominated
from one or two points on the crest.  If the enemy reached
one of those points in daylight he was certain of death.  If
he moved from where he was by daylight he was certain of
death.  His life depended upon the coming of night.  It may
be at once taken for granted that Brown had no particular
concern about the loss of his life; he was not yet oppressed
by the fear of death.  All he prayed for was the opportunity
to continue to delay <i>Ziethen</i> at Resolution.  He had done
all he could at present, all the same.  With dogged
determination he lay upon his ledge of rock waiting for
night&mdash;or for the firing from the crest which would presage
his death.  There is a sublime, hard satisfaction in awaiting
death when one has done all that could be done to avert it.
Brown knew that satisfaction, even while he kept the
cruiser under patient observation lest any further
opportunity should display itself.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XV</i>
</h3>

<p>
The steam pinnace, towing empty boats this time, suddenly
shot into view through the break in the cliffs and
dashed up to <i>Ziethen</i>; in a quarter of an hour she shot out
again with the boats full of men once more.  Machine guns
and rifles opened again from the ship upon the cliffs to
prevent him from firing, but, as before, he had no intention of
doing so.  But he saw the boats turn to port as they had done
the first time before the cliffs cut them from his view.  That
meant that the sweep across the island by a line of men,
which Brown keenly foresaw, would only take place across
a limited length; if he could only move along the island
sufficiently far he would evade the sweep.  Two hundred
men, which was Brown's accurate estimate of their number,
at ten-yard intervals cover two thousand yards and the
outside edge of Resolution is about four thousand yards in
circumference.  Brown realized that he must transfer
himself to a point rather more than half-way round the island
if he were to have any chance of escape.
</p>

<p>
Yet he could not move at all till nightfall.  He waited on
with anxious patience, not knowing from one minute's end
to another when fire would be opened upon him from the
crest of the island.  Even Brown, with his sturdy, thoughtless
resignation of Fate and Duty, cast anxious glances
upward at the sun as it sank steadily in his face.
</p>

<p>
The seaward face of Resolution is very like the inner
face, save that the angle of ascent is much less steep.  The
inner face is the nearly vertical wall of the throat of a
crater; the outer face is the hardened remains of the lava
flow.  But on the outer face the blocks of lava resulting from
sudden cooling are just as razor-edged and difficult of
negotiation, and the cactus is just as impenetrable.  The
German landing party proceeded with German thoroughness.
The first half was lined out along the seashore at
accurate intervals, and was kept waiting until the second
half was brought from the ship and lined out in continuation
of it.  Every man knew his job, which was to push
straight up the face of the island ahead of him, keeping
correct alignment and spacing, scanning every bush and
cranny for the fugitive.  The Lieutenant in command raced
from one end of the line to the other in the steam pinnace,
saw that everything was in order, and took up his position
in the centre of the line.  He gave the word and the line
began its ascent.
</p>

<p>
Alas for the accurate alignment!  The weary climb up the
seaward face was of necessity reduced in pace to that of the
slowest, and the slowest was very slow.  Not until it was
really attempted could anyone guess the fiendish difficulty
involved in moving about on Resolution.  The frightful heat
radiated from the rocks&mdash;which were nearly too hot for the
naked hand&mdash;was the least of the difficulties.  Cactus and
lava combined to lacerate feet and hands.  Two ankles were
sprained in the first half-hour.  The clumsy, rigid line made
excruciatingly slow progress.  Thirst descended instantly
upon the sweating, swearing sailors, and the shirkers among
them&mdash;there must always be shirkers in any large body of
men&mdash;began to hang back and hold up their fellows.  The
fuming officers did their best by example and exhortation
to keep the men on the move, but cramped living in a
cruiser in the tropics is not the best preparation for a
difficult piece of mountaineering.  Here and there parts of the
island were really unscalable, and men were compelled to
move to one side to climb at all; but as soon as the difficulty
was evaded the petty officers, with the pedantic adherence
to orders resulting from an over-strict discipline, held up
their sections of the line until the intervals were corrected.
No one could see very far to the left or right, thanks to
convexity of the face and the lunatic roughness of the surface,
so that any attempt to command or lead the whole line on
the part of the Lieutenant was quite hopeless.  Bound by its
first rigid orders, the line crawled up the face of the island
at a pace much slower than even the slowest among them
could have proceeded alone.
</p>

<p>
An hour before nightfall (at least an hour, that is to
say, later than he had expected to reach the crest) the
exasperated Lieutenant sent word along the line for each
man to push on as best he could.  But it takes time to pass
orders from mouth to mouth along an extended line, and
only one-third of the distance had been covered when they
were issued.  The sun sank gaudily into the purple sea and
night fell with dramatic rapidity to find Brown still unfired
at, and two hundred German sailors spread out and tangled
in the darkness over a mile of leg-breaking rock.
</p>

<p>
Brown waited with sturdy, unyielding patience for
complete darkness.  Throughout the afternoon he had been
peering down the cliff below him, mapping out in his mind
a path down the cliff&mdash;a handhold here, a foothold there, a
slide lower down.  When night came he was ready; his
hands were bound about with strips torn from his jumper,
his equipment fastened about him, his mind as resolute as
ever.  He was glad that the German landing party had not
caught him, but it was a temperate gladness, in no way to
be associated with thankfulness.  It did not occur to him to
be thankful.  Without a regret or a thought save for the
business in hand, he climbed off the shelf which had been
his fortress for twelve hours and swung himself down.  The
cruel lava tore and hacked at him as he slid and tumbled
down the cliff.  The razor edges tore through his shoes and
cut deep into his feet.  The cactus spines scratched great cuts
into his body, making long lines like the marks of a tiger's
claws.  He wrenched ankle and knee so that they pained
him excruciatingly.  Yet he kept in his mind the various
points to be aimed at, and it was not long before he had
covered the three hundred feet of descent and had reached
the place of his landing the day before.
</p>

<p>
The first, ill-fated German landing party had reached the
island a hundred yards away to his right, and it was there
that the tumbled, tossed bodies of its dead lay along with
the dozen wounded whose pitiful cries had climbed the rock
to Brown's ears all the afternoon.  Gladly would Brown
have gone to them, have tried to tend their hurts and given
them the water for which they had moaned unceasingly,
were it not that to do so would have imperilled the execution
of his duty.  As it was, he shut his ears to the pitiful
sounds, just as he had done all day, and proceeded with his
task.  Nothing could weigh in the scale at all against his
conception of what he had to do.  Several of the wounded died
that night.
</p>

<p>
His two lifebelts still lay in their cactus clump, and he
picked them out and buckled them round himself and his
rifle as on the preceding night.  Then he lowered himself
into the water and set out across the lagoon.  The sea-water
added intensely to the pain of his cuts and scratches.
</p>

<p>
The Germans had acted in disagreement with one of
Napoleon's best-known maxims of war&mdash;one should only
manoeuvre about a fixed point; to have done so he needed
to be held, pinned to his position by a menace from the
front.  With the coming of darkness he was free to move
about as much as physical conditions would allow, and that,
as long as the lagoon was open to him, was a considerable
amount.  All the German turning movements, all their
advances upon his rear and his flanks, were useless.  Their
blows were blows in the air as long as Brown could evade
them.
</p>

<p>
Brown paddled steadily round the lagoon fifty yards
from shore, keeping away from the ship.  Far behind him,
on the unseen face of the island, the wretched German
sailors were labouring and toiling as they pursued their
stumbling way over the lava.  Cut feet and sprained ankles
and broken wrists occurred regularly.  The island was alive
with the clash and clatter of dropped rifles and stumbling
feet.  No one knows who fired the first shot.  Most probably
it was an accident, the result of a stumble by some fool
(there are always fools to be found among two hundred
men) who had slipped a cartridge into his rifle.  The noise
of the shot echoed through the darkness.  Brown, paddling
across the lagoon, heard it and wondered.  The example
was infectious.  Bewildered men all along the straggling line
began to load their rifles, and it was only a matter of
seconds before the rifles went off.  The scared iguanas,
nocturnal creatures, scurrying over rocks and round bushes,
gave frights to various people, and there was quite a
respectable bubble of musketry round the island before the
whistles of the officers and the shouted orders brought
about a cessation of fire.  The fact that no one was hit by
the hundreds of bullets which went whistling in all directions
is simply astonishing.  On board <i>Ziethen</i> the sound
was accepted as a welcome proof that the murderous
fugitive had met his fate, the while Brown steadily made
his way across the lagoon to a point on the shore broad
on <i>Ziethen's</i> starboard beam.  Here, with some difficulty, he
found a place where he could land, and once more he let
drop his lifebelts into a cluster of cactus.  Then he set his
teeth and began to climb the steep cliff.
</p>

<p>
But his cuts and his bruises and his stiffness and the
awful rawness of his feet reduced his activity to a pitifully
small minimum.  Climb he must if he were to maintain for
another day his annoyance of <i>Ziethen</i>.  He must be high
enough to be able to beat off attacks from the shore and
to dominate <i>Ziethen's</i> deck.  Also he must be close in to
the foot of an overhanging bit of cliff if he was to have any
security against fire from above, and it would be as well if
he had cover to his left and right in addition, seeing that
there were scores of riflemen at large upon the island
seeking his death.  What he needed was something like a cave
half-way up the cliff, and for this, in the light of the
late-rising moon, he peered about anxiously between his
convulsive, agonized efforts to scale the successive precipices
of the cliff.
</p>

<p>
His rifle and ammunition, too, were serious hindrances to
his progress, and the sweat poured off him and his face was
distorted with strain at each heartbreaking struggle.  Both
his feet and his hands left bloody imprints upon the rock
where they touched it.  Yet he struggled on, upwards and
sideways, to where in the faint light he thought he could
make out a shallow vertical cleft in the cliff face which
might be suitable for his purpose.  It was long past
midnight before he reached it, passed judgment upon it, and
roused himself to one further struggle, despite the stubborn
reluctance of nerves and sinews, to climb yet a little higher
to a better place still.  There he fell half-fainting upon the
harsh lava.
</p>

<p>
Even then, after half an hour's rest, he fought his way
back to consciousness again and raised his head and eyed
<i>Ziethen</i>, whose malignant bulk, black in the faint light,
swam on the magical water of the lagoon.  On her starboard
side, square to his front, hung a faint patch of light, and the
noise of riveters came to his ears over the water.  The hole
in the ship's side, screened forward and aft, and partly
screened in front, had been lit up by electric lights dangled
over the side, and there the repairing crews were toiling
to replace the damaged plates and striving to make up for
the six hours' delay Brown had imposed upon them.
Through the gaps in the outer screen Brown could just see
on occasions human figures moving back and forth, and
with a snarl of fainting determination he slid his rifle
forward.  But he checked himself even as his finger reached
the trigger.  He was too shaky after his exertions to be sure
of hitting hard and often without too many misses.  Besides,
a rifleman, however invisible by daylight, show up all too
plainly by night by reason of the flash of his weapon.  With
enemies possibly within close range he dared not (for the
love of his duty, not of his life) expose himself to this
danger without adequate chance of return.  Brown's fighting
brain weighed all these considerations even while every
fibre of his body shrieked with agony, and he reached a
sound conclusion.  He laid his rifle down, and then, before
even he could settle himself comfortably, he collapsed on
to the rifle butt.  No one knows whether he fainted or slept,
or both.  And meanwhile the two hundred men of the landing
party stumbled and swore as they endeavoured to sweep
across the island, and still fired a stray shot or two when
the strain became too much for their nerves.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XVI</i>
</h3>

<p>
Brown woke, or regained consciousness, just as dawn
was climbing brilliantly up the sky.  His first action was to
drink temperately from the dwindling supply in his second
water-bottle.  His cracked lips and lava-impregnated mouth
and throat permitted of no choice of action.  Then, doggedly,
he began to make sure of his position and situation.
Looking out of his notch in the cliff face, hoisting himself
cautiously on his knees to do so, he saw a dozen white
figures creeping slowly on the very crest of the island a
quarter of a mile from him.  On the inner face of the island,
round about his previous position, he saw about a dozen
others perched precariously here and there, still endeavouring
to carry out their fantastic orders to sweep the island
from one sea to another.  Of the rest of the landing party
Brown could see nothing, but he could guess shrewdly
enough.  They were scattered hither and thither over the
outer face of Resolution, perhaps still struggling on,
perhaps nursing cut feet or broken ankles, perhaps sleeping or
dodging duty in the way unsupervised men will.  Brown
shrank down into his notch again; he was safe enough from
observation, and out of sight, indeed, of nearly every point
of the island.
</p>

<p>
In front, however, <i>Ziethen</i> was in full view.  The gay
screens hung out over the damaged part were like a box
applied to the ship's side&mdash;a box defective down one edge,
however.  Through the gap Brown could see occasionally
a white figure appear and disappear, although for the
moment the noise of the hammers had ceased.  Actually,
with the removal of the damaged plates, the operation now
in progress was the lowering down of the new plates to be
riveted into position.  It was in consequence of the demands
of the tackle for this business that the booms of the screens
had been shifted to leave the small gap Brown noted; and
as Brown had not fired at the ship for fifteen hours a certain
carelessness had been engendered, to say nothing of the
fact that <i>Ziethen</i> believed, and could hardly help believing,
that the landing party had killed Brown hours ago.
</p>

<p>
Brown pulled the oily rag through his rifle barrel; he
oiled the breech, which was beginning to stick badly, and
then he sighted carefully for the gap in the screen.  He
awaited the most favourable moment and then fired twice,
quickly, and he killed the two men he could see.  Then, to
make the most of his surprise, he fired again and again
through the screen, scattering his shots here and there
across it and up and down it.  He actually, although he did
not know it, hit one or two men, and his misses were quite
efficacious also, in that they scared into jumpiness the men
they did not hit.  The moment when a ten-ton steel plate is
swinging in tackles is a bad moment to be shot at.
</p>

<p>
The killings and the wounds and the interruption roused
<i>Ziethen</i> to a pitch of fury previously unreached.  Those on
board were maddened by the deaths of their friends, and
they were furiously angry with the landing party, who had
so absurdly failed in its mission.  Captain von Lutz, in a
flaming rage, set the bridge semaphore into staccato action,
and the wretched Lieutenant in command on shore, staggering
bleared-eyed along the crest after a sleepless night of
fevered action, read the messages he sent with a sick feeling
at his heart.  The vivid sentences poured out by a gesticulating
semaphore as Captain von Lutz vehemently demanded
what on earth the Lieutenant and landing party were about
stung the wretched officer to the quick.  A Japanese
lieutenant would have committed suicide; a German one merely
called out his last reserves of energy and tried to gather a
body of the less faint-hearted and push on round the
island to where Brown lay hidden.
</p>

<p>
On board <i>Ziethen</i> work was suspended temporarily&mdash;another
triumph to Brown's credit.  Too many skilled
ratings had been lost already for the Captain to order his
remaining ones to take the chance of the bullets which
Brown was sending at intervals through the screen.  Instead
he decided to turn <i>Ziethen</i> away from the point of attack,
and to turn an unwieldy armoured cruiser, with her five
hundred feet of length, and listing badly at that, in a lagoon
wherein the tide was swirling in a whirlpool, was an
operation called for care and consuming much time.  The two
anchors had to be raised, the propellers set in motion, and
<i>Ziethen</i> gently nursed into position, one anchor dropped,
the set of the current combated, and then the other anchor
dropped&mdash;and good holding ground was scarce in that
fathomless crater.  Altogether it was an hour before the
delicate operation of mooring was completed and the
delicate operation of lowering the new plates into position was
resumed.  Brown heard at length the clatter of the riveting,
and knew that the delays he had imposed upon <i>Ziethen</i>
were ending at last.
</p>

<p>
But the labours of the landing party were still in full
blast.  The Lieutenant found it hard to move any sort of
force along the island.  His two hundred men were scattered
over a mile of almost impossible country, and the problem
of supplies suddenly leaped into prominence and added
another burden to the Lieutenant's overloaded shoulders.
Every man had landed with a day's water; they had been
violently exerting themselves for nearly twenty-four hours,
and nine men out of ten had consumed the last drop of
their water several hours back.  The Equatorial sun, mounting
steadily higher, called the attention of everyone to his
overwhelming thirst.  The unhappy Lieutenant signalled
to his captain that he could not hope to move without
water.  Captain von Lutz signalled back in blistering
fashion, but the Lieutenant, under the spur of most dire
and urgent necessity, held to his contention.  The Captain,
raging, sent off water to him round the island, and his
Commander as well, to take over control, under strict orders not
to return without bringing back Brown, dead or alive.
</p>

<p>
For the moral situation was serious.  No captain could
dream of setting out on a long and arduous cruise with a
crew in such a temper as <i>Ziethen's</i> was.  Thirty-four men
killed and wounded (their loss alone would be a serious
nuisance with prize crews to be thought of) and two
ignominious reverses had upset discipline to a tiresome
extent.  If <i>Ziethen</i> were to sail away without taking
vengeance on Brown the crew would lose all respect for their
officers.  And discipline would be under severe strain on a
raiding voyage, with its necessary accompaniments of
coaling at sea, and loot, and imminent prospects of a fight.
Captain von Lutz, weighing all factors in the situation,
decided that Brown must die, even though killing him
meant prolonging their dangerous sojourn in the vicinity of
land and postponing their ravening onslaught upon British
shipping.
</p>

<p>
So the water was sent, and the Kapitan-Leutnant took
over the command; and he did not find it an easy burden.
To distribute water among his scattered, weary command,
each individual of whom was stuck where he was nearly as
effectively as a fly upon a fly-paper, consumed hours of
time and much of the strength of the twenty men he
brought as reinforcements.  It was afternoon before he was
ready to make his first move, and by that time the riveting
on <i>Ziethen</i> was completed and she was a whole ship again,
ready to steam out of Resolution.  Brown could now credit
himself with further delays to her&mdash;all the length of time, in
fact, which he occupied in dying.
</p>

<p>
The Commander acted with energy.  He sent his
casualties&mdash;heat-stroke, broken ankles, cut feet&mdash;down the cliff to
where the first landing had been made.  There the men
Brown had wounded the day before at last received
attention and water; the dead and wounded were sent back to
the ship for attention or burial, but all this was in rear of
the Commander's headquarters and main line of assault.
Having purged his force of its weaker elements, the
Commander proceeded to make his way along the crest of the
island, while a boat with full crew lay ready to dash to any
point to which it might be signalled, and another one landed
more men across the opening of the lagoon to cut off any
attempt Brown might make to evade attack again.  The
Commander, thrusting aside with contempt the expostulations
of the Lieutenant he had superseded, still did not
realize the hopelessness of movement on the land, or, if he
did, he did not care how much time the business consumed
as long as it was done thoroughly.  From <i>Ziethen's</i> bridge
he had watched the failure of the first frontal assault, and
he was not going to throw away another dozen lives in that
fashion.  These long, weary flanking movements were the
alternative, and he accepted it stoically.  All the same, a day
of little water and a night of no rest had taken most of the
heart out of his men, and it was woefully slow progress that
he made.  Night came down and found his men still tangled
utterly in the crevasses of Resolution.  It found Brown, too,
lodged in his cleft in the cliff, tormented with thirst, running
a dry tongue round his cracked lips, agonized by the pain in
his hands and feet, bitten in every part of his body by the
vicious flies, but all the same without a thought of
surrender.  That simply did not occur to him.  It was not
consonant with his heredity nor with his childish training.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XVII</i>
</h3>

<p>
Herr Hans Schmidt lay sleeping peacefully and noisily in
his porch in Panama.  He lay on his back; when he went to
sleep his hands had been crossed upon his stomach, but
with the passage of time they had slid down the incline
until now they lay on his chest, so that his attitude was
entirely one of peace and resignation.  Beside him Frau
Schmidt slumbered just as peacefully and not quite as
noisily; for the Schmidts believed in maintaining the good
old tradition of the family double bed despite the heat of
the tropics.
</p>

<p>
Verily was Herr Schmidt entitled to the blissful sleep
which comes of a sense of completed duty.  He was head of
the German unofficial representatives on the Pacific coast,
and all his work so far had been thorough and successful.
He had gleaned from stray references the strength of
Admiral Cradock's squadron and he had reported it to
Admiral von Spee, and the result had been obvious at
Coronel.  At Guayaquil and Callao he had colliers ready to
sail on the instant&mdash;one of them, thanks to lavish expenditure
of funds and jugglery with papers, actually under the
British flag.  Should von Spee decide to return northwards
from Coronel he would find abundance of best Welsh steam
coal awaiting him, or if <i>Ziethen</i> turned up unexpectedly
there would be the same kindly reception ready for her.
Everywhere German agents were seeking bits of news to
report to him, so that he could piece them together and pass
them on.  He knew all about the British battle cruiser in the
West Indies, and he could name the ships which were
watching lest German commerce destroyers should push
out of American Atlantic ports; he did not know, all the
same, about Admiral Sturdee's fleet which was fitting out in
England, but for that he bears no blame.  The discovery of
the object of this squadron was the business of the central
organization, which failed lamentably.  No, Schmidt had
done everything that could be expected of him, and he was
fully entitled to the blissful sleep which encompassed him
and which was about to be so rudely interrupted.
</p>

<p>
The telephone at the bedside rang sharply, and Schmidt
started up, blinking himself into rapid wakefulness.  Beside
him his wife muttered heavily, humped over on her side,
and clawed her tangled hair out of her eyes.  She switched
on the light while Schmidt pulled back the mosquito net
and reached for the telephone instrument.
</p>

<p>
The first sounds to reach his ear were apparently
meaningless gibberish, but it seemingly did not disconcert him.
He uttered gibberish in reply, and with password and
countersign thus exchanged his agent could safely pour
forth his news into Herr Schmidt's receptive ear.  The
torrent of rapid German was of an import which made
Herr Schmidt start in surprise.
</p>

<p>
'What?' he demanded.  'Where are they now?'
</p>

<p>
'They were going through Gatun when I tried to telephone
first, sir,' came the answer.  'They must be almost at
the Cut now.'
</p>

<p>
'But why did I not hear of this at once?' demanded Herr
Schmidt savagely.
</p>

<p>
The voice at the receiver fell away into a placatory
whine.
</p>

<p>
'I couldn't, sir.  Really, sir.  These two Englishmen here
were too closely after us.  They've taken Schulz.  I'm sure
they have.  I've told you about them often before.  I simply
couldn't get a line to Panama before this.  They were all too
busy, sir.'
</p>

<p>
'Rubbish!' exploded Herr Schmidt.  'You Gatun set are
a gang of cowards and worse.  You say you don't even know
the battle cruiser's name?'
</p>

<p>
'No, sir.  Couldn't get it anyway.  But it's a battle cruiser
for certain.  Twenty thousand tons.  And the light cruiser's
the <i>Penzance</i>.'
</p>

<p>
'Bah!' said Schmidt.  'Get her name at once.  And all
about her&mdash;where she comes from and what she's doing.
If you can't do that in Gatun you're not on my pay list any
more.  Report again in two hours' time.'
</p>

<p>
Schmidt slammed down the receiver and heaved himself
out of bed.  His hairy legs protruded beneath his brief
nightshirt, and there was a hint of hairy chest at its open throat.
He put on his thick round glasses with one hand and
reached for his trousers with the other.  While pulling on
his trousers he thrust his bare feet anyhow into his shoes.
Then, with a growl at his wife, he went clattering out of the
house to the garage.  Three minutes later, in the growing
light of dawn, his car was roaring out of Panama with its
headlights blazing, while Schmidt, thick body bent, grasped
the wheel in his big hairy hands.  Out of Panama he went,
with his car leaping madly over the fantastic bumps and
hollows of the country road.  He tore through the ruins of
Old Panama and onward where the road degenerated into
a mere track at the spot where the Canal Zone adjoined the
Republic of Panama.  A steady hand and powerful wrists
were necessary to hold the car to the track, but burly Hans
Schmidt was a brilliant driver.  He swung aside on to
an even narrower path where the undergrowth crashed
beneath his wheels and tore at the body.  Uphill he went, his
foot steady on the accelerator, until the path ran into a
small clearing beyond which stood a tall half-ruined
building which, nevertheless, by its patching and by the
condition of its courtyard, showed signs of recent occupation.
Here Schmidt stopped the car, and with an agility
unexpected in one of his bulk he scrambled out and rushed
into the building and up the rotten stone stairs.
</p>

<p>
The tall room at the top of the tower was modern in
its furnishings; indeed, the modernity was carried to an
extreme pitch, for the main parts of the furniture comprised
a receiving and transmitting wireless plant of the highest
possible power.  The old ruined tower, once a fortress which
had been taken and sacked by Morgan and his buccaneers
two and a half centuries ago, was now one of the central
ganglia of the German Pacific secret service.  On a camp
bed at one side of the room lay a young man, half asleep,
at the table by the instruments sat another, with the
receivers on his ears.  They both looked up when Herr
Schmidt entered, but they were treated with scant courtesy.
Schmidt's first action was to jerk head and thumb back to
the door, and they rose slowly to obey.  The one with the
instruments offered Schmidt the bearing pad the messages
recently intercepted&mdash;all sorts of messages, in code and
<i>en clair</i>, mercantile and military&mdash;but Schmidt cast it aside
after flipping through its pages and running an eye over the
messages.
</p>

<p>
'Outside,' he growled, 'quickly.'
</p>

<p>
They went, shambling, while Schmidt threw himself into
the chair, adjusted the receiver, and began tuning in the
instruments with his thick hands, making the adjustments
for a general call with steady delicacy.  From a pocket at
the back of his trousers he produced a small book printed
on fine paper; and with a stub of pencil and a scrap of
writing-paper he made a note or two, constantly referring to
the book.  Soon the message he had in mind was written in
code on the paper; with his heavy face upturned to the
ceiling he memorized it, and then, striking a match, he
burnt the piece of paper bearing his notes.  The code book
was thrust back into his pocket, and above it, inside the
pocket, he adjusted the fish-hook which was fastened in the
lining.  The unwary hand which dived into that pocket in
search of Germany's most secret naval code would be
lacerated and torn excruciatingly.  Then Schmidt set about
broadcasting his message, sending it out again and again.
His sub-stations at Callao and Valparaiso would take it in
and relay it; the cables would bear it by devious routes
back to Germany.  Von Spee on the Chilean coast would
receive it; the <i>Ziethen</i>, lost somewhere in the Pacific,
would take it in as well.  Hour after hour Schmidt sent out
that message, sitting in his grotesque garb of nightshirt and
trousers while the sweat ran down his unshaved cheeks and
heavy jowl.  It was not the sort of message he could trust
to subordinates.
</p>

<p>
For the tremendous naval strength of England was to be
exerted against von Spee's squadron.  There was to be no
more attempts to engage him with armoured cruisers or
obsolete battleships.  There was a new power at the
Admiralty&mdash;Fisher, who had become First Sea Lord at the
time of the disaster at Coronel.  Von Spee was to be
hounded down and exterminated.  Battle cruisers were to be
used, the most deadly enemies of the armoured cruiser.
Admiral Sturdee was to be sent from England with
<i>Invincible</i> and <i>Inflexible</i> and half a dozen modern cruisers
round the Horn to sweep northwards up the Pacific.  But
this part of the plan was unknown to Schmidt&mdash;it was
unknown to any German until von Spee at the Falklands saw
the tripod masts of the battle cruisers and read his death
in that sight.  The southward sweep was what concerned
Schmidt at the moment.
</p>

<p>
H.M. battle cruiser <i>Leopard</i> had been stationed for three
weeks already in the West Indies; there she could guard
against von Spee, or any detachment from his force, passing
the Panama Canal and ravaging the rich English shipping
of the Caribbean and the Gulf, and there also she could
be ready to cut off any movement of the Germans
northward round the Horn.  But to the new personality at the
Admiralty any such defensive attitude was distasteful and
obnoxious.  <i>Leopard</i> must be used offensively.  Let her pass
the Canal herself, instead of waiting for the Germans to do
it; let her seek out the enemy instead of waiting passively
for the enemy to come within her grasp.  It was the truer,
more decisive strategy, and the orders were passed to
<i>Leopard</i> on the same day that the other orders were given
to Admiral Sturdee.
</p>

<p>
So that <i>Leopard</i> and her attendant light cruiser <i>Penzance</i>
had passed out of the West Indies and the cognizance of the
German agents there, and was even now making the passage
of the Canal, the first ship of all Britain's fleet to make
use of the waterway&mdash;one month open, only.  The whining
voice on Herr Schmidt's telephone had told him of her
passing Gatun lock, and now, while Schmidt was broadcasting
his warning to all who might read it, she was going
through Miraflores lock and her bow was wet with the salt
water of the Pacific.  Her twenty-four knots and her 12-inch
guns meant death to any German ship on that ocean; small
wonder, then, that Herr Schmidt received the news so
gravely, and small wonder that he prayed to his German
God that the electrical disturbances of the Pacific would
not prevent the reception of the warning he was sending
out.  With the damp, sticky heat calling forth the sweat from
every pore he bent again and again to his duty, his masterful
hands tapping out the staccato Morse at regular
half-hour intervals.  He did his duty thoroughly, as every
German did.  From down below came the faint thud-thud of
the engine and the deep hum of the dynamo; the shrill
whine of the mosquitoes circling round the sweating head
blended with the hum.  They bit the back of his thick neck,
and they sought out his uncovered ankles.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XVIII</i>
</h3>

<p>
Albert Brown had spent a weary night.  Before morning
he had used the last of his water, and his thirst occupied
nearly all his thoughts.  His hunger had led him to eat some
of his tinned provisions, and that, of course, increased his
thirst inordinately.  From the cessation of the noise of the
riveting on board <i>Ziethen</i> he deduced that repairs were
completed, but as long as a landing party was on shore it
was his duty to go on fighting and keep it occupied, and so
detain <i>Ziethen</i> longer still at Resolution.  He fought down
his thirst, and he fell now and again into a troubled sleep,
from which he awoke each time with a start and listened
to the clamorous noises made in the otherwise still night by
the landing party.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to imagine the condition of the surface of
Resolution.  Think of a stretch of mud exposed to the sun.
It cracks in all directions, breaking up into small cakes.
The lava of Resolution has done the same thing; the pieces
of lava of which it is composed are of much the same size
and shape as a dining-room table would be if it were solid
down to the end of its legs, and the cracks between the
pieces vary in depth from one to ten feet.  Now realize that
the edges of each cake are sharp as knives, and that the
surfaces of each cake are seamed with minor cracks whose
edges are equally sharp.  Add to this the facts that
landslides and earthquake action have tumbled the blocks over
each other higgledy-piggledy, and that the general slope of
the whole mass is on one side steeper than the roof of a
house and on the other nearly as steep.  Finally, dot the
whole slopes with intensely spiny cactus, and a faint mental
picture can be formed of the difficulty of progress over
them in the dark, especially when hampered by thirst on a
hot night.  A hundred yards in an hour is a high speed&mdash;six
hundred yards in six hours is impossible.
</p>

<p>
This was the lesson which each officer of <i>Ziethen</i> had to
learn in turn, and which each refused to accept as truth
from his junior.  The Commander doubted what the
Lieutenant said about it, and Captain von Lutz, who, of
course, did not leave his ship, doubted both the
Commander and the Lieutenant.  When morning came and
found Brown still alive and untaken (he informed every
one of the fact by sending a couple of bullets along
<i>Ziethen's</i> bridge, narrowly missing the officer of the watch),
pleasant expectation on board changed to furious
consternation.
</p>

<p>
The semaphore came into action to goad the unhappy
Commander with a proper sense of his failure.  Captain von
Lutz interfered with the plans of the Commander, and
abruptly sent the last fifty men who could be spared from
the work of the ship in a dash for the inner shore in an
assault upon the place where he judged Brown to be.  He
was only one hundred yards out in his estimate of the line;
that was good judgment, not bad, considering that he had
only the noise of rifle shots echoing from a cliff to guide
him, and that <i>Ziethen</i>, thanks to her turn away, was now
nearly half a mile from Brown.
</p>

<p>
Brown saw the boats coming and turned his rifle upon
them, but now, with his teeth chattering with fever and his
hands trembling, he could not make even moderately good
practice.  He knew that Fate was close upon him as he
looked along the rifle barrel and saw the foresight dancing
like a live thing in the U of the backsight, and as shot after
shot went wide.  But the rifle is a sweet tool, and gives of its
best even in bungling hands as far as in it lies.  Twice
Brown loosed off, almost by accident, at the right moment,
and each time a man in one of the boats collapsed upon his
thwart.  Two casualties could not stop the boats.  They
rushed in to the foot of the cliff and the boats' crews
bundled out, just as in the first misguided attempt,
scattering a little swarm of <i>Amblyrhincus</i>&mdash;marine iguanas&mdash;who
had been comfortably feeding on seaweed at the water's
edge regardless of the din of battle echoing round the
island.
</p>

<p>
Even at a hundred yards Brown found that he made but
poor practice.  He dropped two men only in five shots, and
then, reaching into his pouches to refill his magazine, he
realized that only two of them were full; he had only
twenty rounds left.  With such a small reserve he knew that
he could hardly stop this close attack&mdash;and the one which
must develop soon out on his left would be able to push
forward unopposed.  It was the last, desperate death
grapple.  Brown's lips parted in a harsh grin so that the
black cracks upon them showed in deep contrast with his
white teeth.  He pulled his failing strength together for one
more effort, steadied his weak limbs, and tried to shoot the
attackers down deliberately, one by one.
</p>

<p>
More than one of the struggling attacking party dropped,
but far more by reason of the difficulties of the ascent than
in consequence of the casualties the forward impetus died
away.  Just as before the climbers crouched down in hollows
and crannies; from the sound of Brown's firing they had
formed some idea of his position, and they began to fire
back at him.  Once more Brown heard the sharp noise of
bullets passing close beside him, and once more little puffs
of lava dust arose here and there where the bullets struck.
But on this occasion the attack had begun farther off to one
side and Brown was not perched quite so high up.  So that
his position was not nearly so dominating, and he could not
overlook the lumps of rock behind which lay his enemies.
Only here and there could he see small portions of the
bodies of the men firing at him, and in his shaking
condition he could not hit these with certainty or anything
approaching certainty.  He caused another two casualties,
but these did not deter the forty men who were firing at
him, and when he had filled his magazine with his last
cartridges he had to keep these in reserve to use against the
last rush.  He lay as close to the lava as he could, awaiting
in uncomplaining patience for the end to come, while the
bullets crackled and sang all round about him.
</p>

<p>
Soon his quiescence was noted by those below; the bolder
and the stronger among them heaved themselves up and
made little advances up the face of the cliff from one block
to another, out of one crevice into the next.  Before long
most of the line was bellying forward, up the cliff, and
working along it, emboldened by the cessation of Brown's
fire.  Only half a dozen men, the less energetic or the fainter
hearted, still lay crouched in their cover and maintained a
hectic fire on the patch where they thought Brown lay.
They wasted ammunition at an amazing rate, but they made
an encouraging noise even if they did nothing else.  Brown,
peering with one eye over the edge, could see two or three
men actually only twenty yards below him and fifty yards
away.  Soon one of them would get a clear sight of him, and
that would be the end.  He felt no resentment, either against
Fate or against the men who were about to take his life; he
had done all he could.
</p>

<p>
At that very moment the battle was interrupted.  A
tremendous braying from <i>Ziethen's</i> siren called every one's
attention clamorously to the signal which was being
wig-wagged rapidly and repeatedly from her bridge semaphore.
It was the general recall.
</p>

<p>
For some minutes the attackers hesitated.  It was hard to
go back when success was so close at hand.  But the siren
brayed again, and the semaphore gesticulated feverishly.
No one could act in independence of orders so definite and
so oft repeated.  Reluctantly the officer commanding the
landing party blew his whistle and the attackers turned
back down the cliff, crawling back perilously, dropping
down little precipices, more slowly than they would have
gone had their effort been successful.  Brown saw them go,
and as a last effort he raised himself and sent a bullet
through the shoulder of the officer in command&mdash;which had
the very desirable effect of delaying the retreat while the
landing party turned and wasted much further ammunition
upon him until further trumpetings of <i>Ziethen's</i> siren
recalled them to duty.  They dropped down to the boats, lifted
in their wounded and dead, and pulled slowly back to the
cruiser.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless it was not the evacuation of the island by
the landing party which took up so much time; the real
delay was caused by the huge, useless, straggling mob on
the outer face.  After the Commander in charge had read the
signals from the vantage point on the crest he had so
painfully gained, he had still to pass the word for retreat
throughout the length and breadth of his straggling
command, and having done so he still had to get his men down
to the beaches.  Most of them had been straying loose over
Resolution for nearly forty-eight hours; they were dispirited,
lame, fatigued, and most woefully undisciplined.  Many of
the lazy and insubordinate among them had found crannies
here and there and were stretched out fast asleep in some
tiny area of shade.  In the blinding noonday heat even the
best of the men moved slowly when the heart was taken
out of them by the order to retreat, and many of them
strayed back in directions quite opposite to the one the
Commander desired.  The frightful heat of the rocks,
enough to blister a bare hand laid upon them, discouraged
activity; men who would struggle cheerfully forward into
action would soon cease to struggle when defeat, and that
by a single man, had to be admitted.  The Commander and
the Lieutenant raved and swore as much as their dry
throats permitted, while the sweat drenched their soiled
ducks; the petty officers struggled to keep the men within
earshot of them on the move; but it was a painful, hopeless
task.  A man a hundred yards away might as well be ten
miles away for all the use it was giving orders to him&mdash;there
was no going back to him without wasting another hour.
</p>

<p>
To the wretched Commander on the crest the hours after
noon seemed to race by; the sun seemed to sink towards
the horizon at three times its usual speed, while the
messages spilt out by the accursed semaphore became more
and more caustic.  He watched the incredibly slow progress
of his men down to the boats with fever consuming his soul.
There seemed no end to the white-clad figures who came
into sight one after the other, round the bulge of the island
at ten minute intervals&mdash;and some of them were actually
still trying to make their way up to the crest instead of down
to the boats.
</p>

<p>
Seaman Muller, the ship's bad character, came struggling
along the top of the crest past the Commander.  His feet
were very sore and his clothes were in tatters, and his gait
was, to use a homely simile, like that of a cat on hot bricks.
With his rifle hitched over his shoulder he was picking his
way along the more easy stretch of small lava at the top of
the island.  He came within fifty yards of the blaspheming
Commander, who shouted to him to get away diagonally
down the slope to the boats, but Seaman Muller made an
inaudible reply&mdash;he was not a very disciplined character at
the very best of times.  He was certainly not going to plunge
down into that awful inferno of rocks and cactus until he
had to.  He would keep along the crest until he was above
the boats, and then he would, perhaps, graciously go down
the steep slope.  Until then he was going to keep to this
easier part of the island&mdash;easier, but most uneasy.  He
hitched his equipment about him and continued the
agonizing effort of struggling up and down the lava blocks.
</p>

<p>
A hundred yards past the Commander he stopped to rest.
He sat down where a lava block now cast a fair amount
of shade, thanks to the setting of the sun.  He mopped his
streaming face; he considered his thirst and went off into
a happy dream, imagining one hundred ways of quenching
it, in none of which water took any part whatever.  And as
he allowed these delightful visions to play over him his eye
roamed about carelessly over the tangle of cliff across the
arc of the lagoon.  A quarter of a mile away, one-third the
way up the cliff, he seemed to see a speck of something
which was neither cliff nor cactus.  It might be the head and
shoulder of a man who was kneeling up and peering round
about over the top of a block of lava.  Seaman Muller
unslung his rifle and threw himself upon his face.  He
slipped a cartridge into the breech.  The red splendour of
the setting sun illuminated the speck of target presented to
him.  Muller was neither a good shot nor a musketry
enthusiast.  He took aim and fired just as he would have
thrown a stone at a stray cat or bird.  He did not even see
whether he hit what he aimed at, for at the sound of the
shot the empurpled face of a petty officer shot up from a
hollow close beside him and an order bellowed into his ear
roused even the undisciplined Muller to rise to his feet and
sling his rifle and continue his slouching march back to the
boats.  And for firing the shot against orders he was very
properly run into the punishment cells as soon as he and the
Commander had reached <i>Ziethen</i> again.
</p>

<p>
But that last shot, fired in the last few minutes of daylight,
had reached its billet.  The sharp-nosed bullet had hit
Brown high up on the right shoulder; it had smashed a rib
and a shoulder-blade on its way through, and had flung him
back into his crevice.  At first he was merely numb.  He put
his hands to his wound and was surprised to find them red
with blood.  It was some time before pain came&mdash;after the
sun had set, in fact.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XIX</i>
</h3>

<p>
The beginnings of Herr Schmidt's urgent calls had reached
<i>Ziethen</i> soon after sunrise, but they were in a very
mutilated form and so distorted that it could not even be
guessed what cypher was being employed.  The wireless
telegraphist declared he could recognize the touch on the
key of the main American agent, but this thin bit of
evidence carried no weight.  Only later was clear proof
obtained that the message was in the Most Secret code, and
from Schmidt himself, and it was nearly noon before the
fragments of successive messages could be pieced together
so that Captain von Lutz could read their dread import&mdash;that
a British battle cruiser and light cruiser had passed the
Panama Canal into the Pacific.  As soon as he was sure of it
there was no hesitation about his decisions.  With certain
death cruising after him in this fashion he was not going to
linger within sight of land.  He issued immediate orders for
the recall of the landing party.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, as has been seen, those orders were more
easily issued than obeyed.  It was past three o'clock by the
time that the inner landing party had reached the ship with
a fresh load of wounded and dead to madden those who
had stayed on board, and by the time night fell on Resolution
only the smallest driblets of the other force had trickled
down to the boats; there were still nearly two hundred men
hopelessly entangled on the slope.  And with the coming of
darkness the task of getting the weary men to imperil neck
and limb by continuing the descent became hopeless.  The
petty officers blew their whistles and bellowed orders
through megaphones into the night, but they did small
enough good.  Now and again a little group or a stray
individual would come sliding down the last descent to where
the boats lay, but the hours went by and the numbers on
the cliff had not diminished very much.  Messages flashed to
<i>Ziethen</i> did nothing to allay the impatience of Captain von
Lutz as he strode about fuming.  With very little additional
motive he would have taken the ship out and abandoned
what was left of the landing party, but it was really too
much to risk.  Even if he had them all back, <i>Ziethen</i> would
be perceptibly shorthanded, thanks to the casualties Brown
had caused and the innumerable cut feet and sprained
ankles incurred.  The loss of another fifty men would be
extremely serious, for Captain von Lutz had to bear in
mind the prospect of strenuous coaling at sea and of
sending away prize crews, to say nothing of having to fight
further battles against hostile ships.  He could not bring
himself to abandon the stragglers, especially as it meant
leaving them to certain death on a waterless island.  He
could only fret and fume and send orders to get the men
into the boats as soon as possible, the while he calculated
the chances of the British battle cruiser setting a course for
the Galapagos and the time it would take her to get there.
</p>

<p>
The night wore through and morning came, and the
broad light of day was pouring upon the tortured rocks
before the last worn straggler came stumbling into the
boats; it was almost high noon before <i>Ziethen</i> had her
anchors up and was heading out of that accursed lagoon to
the open sea with a depressed, weary crew and exasperated
officers.  For once the magnificent German efficiency had
come to grief; the stern German discipline had failed.  Much
may be made of the rocks and thorns of Resolution, but
some people are inclined to take most of the credit for
the achievement away from these natural and incidental
circumstances and bestow it upon Leading Seaman Brown,
who had voluntarily opposed himself to the might of an
armoured cruiser, who had foreseen that the enterprise
would cost him his life, and who had gladly paid this price
without hope of applause for the sake of the Navy in which
he served.
</p>

<p>
For Brown was dying surely enough.  A night of torture
had followed his wound.  The pain came steadily, growing
stronger and stronger as the crushing numbness following
the initial shock had died away.  He was in a high fever, and
the dreadful pain made him heave and toss in pitiful,
child-like efforts to get away from what was tormenting him.  He
had been thirsty enough before, but that thirst was nothing
compared to the suffering he was now experiencing.  Several
times that night he had struggled back to consciousness,
obsessed by an overwhelming thought that there might be a
little water left in one of his two water-bottles.  Each time
he had writhed himself about until his left hand could
grasp them and draw the corks and raise each in turn to
his cracked and swollen lips.  Once only&mdash;the first time&mdash;had
this agonizing effort encountered success; three or four
drops of fluid, cool and delightful, trickled out of the
bottle's iron neck into his furred mouth, but that was all.
There was never anything in either of the bottles afterwards,
but Brown always hoped there was.
</p>

<p>
And as Brown held his left hand to his riven shoulder a
troubled memory drifted into his mind of the German boy
he had shot through the shoulder the day before yesterday.
Brown's regretful mind recalled just how that boy had
rolled out from behind his cover, trying to hold his shoulder
together just as Brown was doing now.  He remembered the
frown of pain upon the boy's pleasant face, and he
remembered how all day afterwards he had lain in the torturing
sun with the flies thick about him, calling feebly in his
unknown tongue for what Brown guessed must be water.
Water!  Of course it was water for which he was asking.  No
one would dream of asking for anything else; there was
nothing else in all this world one-millionth part as valuable
as water.  The heartbroken cries of the German boy echoed
in Brown's ears with pathetic persistence; he heard them so
long that he felt he must rouse himself to satisfy them.
Once he had made up his mind to the effort it was easy
enough.  There had descended upon him a God-given ability
to float quietly and without effort through the air; it was so
easy Brown was surprised he had not discovered it before.
He floated down to where the German boy was lying, with
the sun on his pale hair; he took his hand, and the boy
opened his eyes and smiled.  It was such a friendly smile;
Albert loved him from that moment for the niceness of his
blue, childlike eyes and his golden sunburn.  Brown lifted
him ever so easily just by the hand he held, and together
they drifted away from the ugly sharp rocks into a place
where there was a pleasant shade.  The boy turned to him
and made a gentle inquiry, and Brown nodded his head
and said, 'Presently.'  So they went on to where tall trees
reared themselves up over a meadow of green grass, and
there, beside the trees, there was a little, deep river of clear
water; you could see it winding away over the green plain.
And they drank of the water, and it was perfectly cool and
wonderful.  They drank and they drank, and they turned to
each other and laughed with their happiness, and then
they lowered themselves into the clear depths and drifted
with the stream, lapped about with water, in companionable
nakedness.  Everything was very friendly and happy and
most blissfully perfect.
</p>

<p>
Then Brown turned and smiled to the pale-haired boy
again, but he did not smile back.  Instead his face was
contorted with pain again, and he menaced Brown with his fists
and glared at him with wild eyes, and Brown writhed back
from him and found that the cool water had fallen away
from around him, leaving him on the rocky bottom.  And it
was hot again, and the rocks beneath him were sharp&mdash;oh,
and his shoulder hurt him so!  With a start and a groan
Brown came back to consciousness, to a dark world wherein
flaming wheels hovered on his eyelids&mdash;a world of torment
and agony and thirst, thirst, thirst.
</p>

<p>
The good things of this world had passed him by.  He had
never had an eye for the joy and wonder of a woodland
triumphant with primroses or mysterious with bluebells.  He
had never known woman's love, not even bought love, and
he had never known the love of a child, the touch of a tiny
soft palm upon his cheek and fairy laughter.  He knew
nothing of the grim majesty of Lear nor of the sunny
happiness of Twelfth Night.  Good food and good wine and the
glory of Rembrandt had alike passed him by.  Never even
had he known liberty; he had been all his life the slave
either of a mother's ambition or of a Navy which demands
her servitors' all to bestow upon unthinking ingrates.  All his
happiness, all his talents, his life itself, had been swept
away in the tide of the Iron Age, the Age of the Twelve-Inch
Gun.  The achievements of Brown at twenty embraced
nothing older than death and destruction.  Brown might
have died at eighty in a better-adjusted world and left
behind him a long record of steady addition to the sum of
human happiness, and the test of that might be whether he
had not left behind any materials for a story.  Yet if Brown
had had the choice, just before his landing on Resolution,
he would undoubtedly have selected for himself the career
which has been outlined in these pages, and other people
would have chosen the same for him too.
</p>

<p>
Brown never knew the satisfaction of success; he never
knew what stupendous results eventually crowned his efforts.
Later on that last day he came back to consciousness; he
swept the flies from his face and, under the impulse of his
one consuming motive, he edged himself to the brink of the
rock and peered out over the lagoon.  The blue, blue water
luxuriated in the drenching sunshine; the grim surround of
cliffs danced and wavered in the shimmering heat before
his reeling eyes.  At the water's edge the marine iguanas
browsed upon the seaweed as their Stone Age great-grandfathers
had done.  Far out at sea the gulls wheeled and sank
over the grey line that marked the ocean currents' edge.
But of <i>Ziethen</i> Brown could see nothing; the jagged cliffs
cut off from his view the smudge of smoke which marked
where she was heading out for the horizon.  She had gone;
she had got clear, and all Brown's efforts to detain her had
only ended in a trivial forty-eight hours' delay, of no
importance at all in a six months' cruise.  Brown fell forward
on to the rock again with a groan of broken-hearted
despair, and flaming thirst and dreadful pain wrapped him
about once more.  They killed him between them, did pain
and thirst, before the end of that day.  He had been a
plaguey long time dying, but he was dead at last.
</p>





<h3>
Chapter XX
</h3>

<p>
Captain Richard E. S. Saville-Samarez, C.B., M.V.O.,
sat alone in his cabin at his desk pondering the problems
set before him by the terse Admiralty instructions received
by wireless and cable, by the small Pacific chart before him
bearing the estimated positions of von Spee and his
squadron, and by the various possibilities which had gradually
accumulated in his not highly imaginative brain.  Of a
surety his passage of the Panama Canal in H.M.S. <i>Leopard</i>
with <i>Penzance</i> in company had caused very considerable
stir.  The Canal authorities had been dubious enough about
letting him through, despite the fact that His Britannic
Majesty's representative on the spot had made preparations
for his arrival twenty-four hours before, quoting terms and
treaties which declared the Canal open to all shipping
whether in peace or war.  Cables everywhere had been alive
with the news when he entered the Canal; excited American
papers would on the morrow be informing their readers that
at last the British Navy had shown a sign of life instead of
leaving hapless squadrons to be exterminated by von Spee.
Already <i>Leopard's</i> presence would be notified to Berlin,
and German diplomatists would protest the while the
German Admiralty noted the information and weighed
anxiously the effect of this slight dispersion upon the
crushing superiority of the Grand Fleet at Scapa, where thirty
Dreadnoughts awaited the emerging of the High Sea Fleet
from its mine-fields and protected harbours.
</p>

<p>
Captain Saville-Samarez was not very different in
appearance from what he had been twenty years before; he was
not of the type that alters greatly with age.  There were
grey hairs now among his irrepressible brown ones, and
authority and responsibility had brought character into his
face; there were two firm vertical lines between his
eyebrows, and his eyes seemed deeper set, and there was a grim
line or two about his mouth, but he still seemed
extraordinarily young, with his fresh complexion and upright
carriage.  Truth to tell, responsibility and authority sat
lightly on his shoulders; he was never a man for deep
thought or of much imagination, and the steadiness of his
nerve had brought him out of whatever difficulties he had
found himself in without any ageing flurry or worry.  Little
jobs like picking up moorings in a twenty-thousand-ton
battleship in a crowded harbour with a full gale blowing he
had simply accepted and carried through with
automatically-acquired skill, and without any frightening pictures of
what might happen if he made a mistake.
</p>

<p>
But just at present he was thinking deeply and trying his
utmost to use all the imagination he possessed.  He realized
how fortunate he had been at present, the commander of a
battle cruiser was perhaps the biggest plum in the Service
open to one of his rank.  Moreover, he held an independent
command at present, and the exigencies of the Service had
put <i>Penzance</i> under his command as well.  He grinned to
himself at the recollection of the series of chances which
had kept <i>Leopard</i> free from admirals&mdash;there were dozens
of admirals who might have received the chance, and been
glad of it, under some slight variation of circumstances.
And an admiral would of course have gained the credit of
any exploits <i>Leopard</i> might achieve, and Captain
Saville-Samarez would be forgotten, forced to be content with a
casual inevitable reference in the official report.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, an admiral, while receiving the credit of
success, would also have to bear the responsibility for
failure, and in the absence of an admiral that responsibility
would belong to Captain Saville-Samarez, and the Captain
was almost worried about it.  His instructions gave him a
free enough hand; what he had to do was to hunt down von
Spee and his squadron, concerting for that purpose with
the other officers on the spot.  The only tie upon him was the
emphasis laid in his orders upon the necessity to keep
<i>Leopard</i> from damage, no destruction of armoured cruisers
would be worth the loss of a battle cruiser.  To a staff officer
such a condition would appear natural enough, as <i>Leopard</i>
had an advantage of at least four knots in speed over any of
von Spee's armoured cruisers, and her guns outranged any
of von Spee's by a couple of miles or more.  But if <i>Leopard</i>
by herself encountered von Spee with his three armoured
cruisers all at once&mdash;<i>Scharnhorst</i>, <i>Gneisenau</i> and
<i>Ziethen</i>&mdash;things might not be so easy.  Two cruisers might close into
range while he was sinking the third, or they might all
scatter and he would be lucky to bag one of them, while the
light cruisers would make themselves unpleasant simultaneously
by trying to torpedo him.  <i>Penzance</i> might get
badly hit too, and that would be his fault as well.  The rage
of the British public if it heard that a damaged British ship
had had ignominiously to seek internment in a neutral port
would be unbounded.
</p>

<p>
So that a battle, were one to take place, would demand
caution&mdash;it was this need for caution which was one of the
factors worrying the Captain.  And, all the same, a battle
need not necessarily take place.  Von Spee had last been
heard of three thousand miles away, and to find a squadron
hidden in three thousand miles of water was not an easy
matter; on the contrary, it was an exceedingly difficult one.
Von Spee might round the Horn and make a dash for home
across the Atlantic and be half-way back before the news
reached <i>Leopard</i>; he might even turn northward again and
slip past <i>Leopard</i> and gain the Panama Canal&mdash;and that
would mean Captain Saville-Samarez's professional ruin.
The Captain realized that he needed all his wits to be sure
of encountering the enemy.
</p>

<p>
And he wanted to encounter them too.  With the age limit
steadily pursuing him up the captain's list, he could see
plainly enough that without something extraordinary
happening he would just reach rear-admiral's rank before
he had to retire.  Unless he did something to distinguish
himself he would end his life as rear-admiral on the retired
list like fifty others he could name.  He wanted to do
something to make his name remembered, and the surest way
would be to sink a German ship or two.  Then the public
would know him as 'Saville-Samarez, the chap who caught
von Spee,' or 'Saville-Samarez, you know, 'im 'oo sank the
<i>Scharnhorst</i>'; and the Captain knew how valuable such a
label tied on to him would be.  It would be very handy if he
went in for politics; it might bring him a K.C.B.&mdash;and he
wanted knighthood, for it had been the reward of his
grandfather and great-grandfather before him.  Above all, it might
obtain for him a fat, comfortable colonial governorship on
his retirement, and Saville-Samarez, with no means beyond
his pay, urgently desired one.  With the reward of success
so rich, and the penalty of failure so severe, it behoved him
to devote all possible energy to the solution of the problem.
</p>

<p>
Characteristically, however, he was making his final
decision by himself.  He had run through the meagre data
with the Captain of <i>Penzance</i>, and heard his opinion, but
he had left the final making up of his mind until he was
alone.  He did not shirk responsibility, and he had the
utmost contempt for those who did&mdash;contempt which was
only equalled by his contempt for councils of war in
general.
</p>

<p>
He looked at the map, whereon von Spee was noted as
as last heard of at Valparaiso.  He studied the scattered
shipping lanes.  He tried to get into von Spee's skin and
work out what he would do in von Spee's position.  He
glanced once more through the last reports of the British
secret agents.  There was coal at German disposal in various
South American Pacific ports, so that there was quite a
sporting chance of von Spee returning northward.  The
wireless room of <i>Leopard</i> was continuously reporting hearing
powerful messages in an unknown code, and it seemed
extremely likely that they were warnings of his approach
sent out to the German squadron.  That made it possible
that the German agents on the mainland thought it
conceivable that German ships were near.
</p>

<p>
Now von Spee had fought at Coronel and had entered
Valparaiso with only two armoured cruisers, <i>Scharnhorst</i>
and <i>Gneisenau</i>.  That was certain.  Therefore his smallest
armoured cruiser <i>Ziethen</i>, had been detached before
Coronel.  Whither would von Spee be likely to send her?
Northward?  Not likely, with the whole Japanese navy on
the look-out for her, and not much plunder to be obtained
in the Northern Pacific.  Westward, to the Indian Ocean?
That was the richest field of all; but <i>Emden</i> was there
already, and the English fleet could as well hunt down two
cruisers as one.  Besides, <i>Charybdis</i> lay on that route and
had made no report of meeting German ships, although that
was no real proof that <i>Ziethen</i> had not gone that way.
(Captain Saville-Samarez did not appreciate the profound
truth of this last deduction.)  South-westward, to New
Zealand and Australian waters?  Quite likely.  But in that case
Captain Saville-Samarez had no business with her; his duty
was to get into touch with the main body.  But supposing
<i>Ziethen</i> had not been sent anywhere like this?  Supposing
she was still near the American coast?  Shipping certainly
had not reported her, but she might have her own reasons
for lying in concealment.  She might have been in collision
or had engine-room trouble.  Certainly it was odd that she
had neither fought at Coronel nor been reported elsewhere.
Now supposing she had been damaged, where would she
try to effect repairs?  Somewhere within wireless reach of
Panama too, added Captain Saville-Samarez, making a
false deduction from Herr Schmidt's activities without
making allowance for that gentleman's supreme conscientiousness
and ignorance of <i>Ziethen's</i> whereabouts.  Captain
Saville-Samarez looked at the map just as Captain von
Lutz had done a week before, and came to exactly the same
conclusion.  The Galapagos Archipelago presented the most
opportunities to a ship in need of repair.
</p>

<p>
Captain Saville-Samarez went on to consider ways and
means.  The Archipelago lay a little out of his direct course
south from Panama.  But <i>Penzance's</i> most economical
cruising speed was far in excess of <i>Leopard's</i>.  The ships
would overlook far more water separated than in company.
And <i>Penzance's</i> speed was far larger than that of any one of
von Spee's squadron, except perhaps <i>Dresden</i>.  She could
look after herself and keep out of danger by herself unless
she experienced the very worst of luck&mdash;and Captain
Saville-Samarez was not of the type which makes mental
pictures of what might happen in the very worst of
circumstances.  He reached his final decision with promptitude.
and did not think about it again.  His signal flew for the
<i>Penzance's</i> Captain to come on board <i>Leopard</i>, and a few
quite brief sentences explained to that officer what Captain
Saville-Samarez wanted done.
</p>

<p>
So that when the Captain of <i>Penzance</i> reached his own
ship again he set a fresh course which gradually took his
ship away from <i>Leopard</i>, diverging slightly away to the
westward as the two ships headed south across the Bay of
Panama.  Leading Seaman Albert Brown at this moment
was only slightly thirsty; Muller's bullet did not hit him
until sunset that day, when <i>Penzance</i> and <i>Leopard</i> had
diverged until they were quite out of sight of each other.
</p>





<h3>
<i>Chapter XXI</i>
</h3>

<p>
Nelson once wrote that five minutes makes the difference
between victory and defeat.  It was hardly more than five
minutes which made the difference between the detection of
<i>Ziethen</i> and her possible escape from observation.  Had
<i>Ziethen</i> only sailed half an hour earlier she would have got
away undetected to begin her career of destruction, and the
history of the world&mdash;of the British Cabinet at any
rate&mdash;would have been different.  For as <i>Penzance</i>, detached by
Captain Saville-Samarez to look round the Galapagos
Archipelago, came down upon Resolution from the north-east,
<i>Ziethen</i> was steering north-west away from the island.
Just as Resolution came in sight a pair of keen eyes on
<i>Penzance</i> detected a little trace of smoke far away on the
westerly horizon.  Smoke in that lost corner of the world
was uncommon, and therefore suspicious, and <i>Penzance</i>
headed after it in all the pride of her twenty-seven knots.
In half an hour <i>Ziethen</i> was definitely identified, and the
ether was thrilling with the news as <i>Penzance</i> broadcast her
information.
</p>

<p>
Vain it was now for <i>Ziethen</i> to try to jam <i>Penzance's</i>
messages.  <i>Leopard</i> was only a hundred miles away; besides,
the men who built and equipped <i>Penzance</i> had a very clear
idea of the duties she was to perform, which is more than
can be said of those who built <i>Charybdis</i>.  <i>Penzance</i> was one
of the most modern of cruisers, designed solely to be of the
utmost service to battleships.  She was a battleship's eyes,
a battleship's message bearer, and her immense speed and
her powerful wireless installation were given her solely
for these ends.  Her news trickled in to <i>Leopard</i> hardly
mutilated, and that great ship swung her twenty-thousand
tons round in pursuit.
</p>

<p>
The Captain of <i>Penzance</i> knew his duty.  Although his
ship could match <i>Ziethen's</i> 6-inch guns with 6-inch guns of
her own, it was not his business to put her fragile hull
within reach when there was a battle cruiser no distance off
who would do the business for him without any risk of
damage.  <i>Ziethen</i> was a bigger ship and carried armour
far more effective than <i>Penzance's</i> fragile protective deck.
<i>Penzance</i> could only possess the speed she boasted by
reason of abandoning nearly all other protection; <i>Ziethen</i>,
built in an age when the naval mind was a little muddled,
had tried to combine all factors, speed (twenty knots at the
time of her launching was a high speed), hitting power
(German authorities did not place the same value upon
large calibres as did the English) and armour, with the
result that now she was helpless against a specialist.
</p>

<p>
She challenged action boldly enough; she wheeled, with
her guns trained out upon <i>Penzance</i> and the range-takers
eagerly chanting the ranges; she charged forward, but
<i>Penzance</i> was not inclined to accept the challenge.  Not a
man on board who would not gladly have fought <i>Ziethen</i>
to the death, but what was the use of incurring senseless
losses when <i>Leopard</i> was pounding up behind with her
12-inch guns, which would settle the matter without <i>Ziethen</i>
having the chance of scoring a hit?  <i>Penzance</i> kept away.
Her seven knots advantage in speed was overwhelming.  No
possible manoeuvre of <i>Ziethen's</i> could inveigle her into
range.  It was not very long before <i>Ziethen</i> sullenly
abandoned her attempt to make a fight of it and turned
southwards at full speed in the hope of shaking off pursuit, or of
closing in to a fight, when darkness came.  And in reply to
<i>Penzance's</i> reports <i>Leopard</i> turned away to a converging
course, working up to her full twenty-four knots, edging
rapidly up to the two ships which were cleaving their way
through the blue Pacific.
</p>

<p>
It was then, perhaps, during the weary hours of that long
pursuit, that Captain von Lutz tasted defeat and failure
and self-contempt at their bitterest.  One single man had
caused this disaster; one man armed with a rifle had
brought about the destruction of <i>Ziethen</i>.  Captain von Lutz
looked back over those three days at Resolution.  A single
one of them would have sufficed to repair <i>Ziethen</i> and set
her off again upon her career of destruction.  <i>Emden</i> had
done ten million pounds' worth of destruction, and was still
loose upon the Indian Ocean.  What of <i>Ziethen</i>, with her
more powerful guns and armour?  She had fought and sunk
one miserable third-class cruiser thirty years old which
mattered neither one way nor another in the clash of
nations.  Now, because one wretched English sailor had
held her up at Resolution for forty-eight hours longer than
was necessary, <i>Ziethen's</i> career was being ended.  Captain
von Lutz had no illusions about that.  He knew that a battle
cruiser and a light cruiser had passed the Canal; the light
cruiser had arrived and was keeping him under observation,
so that the battle cruiser could not be far away.  And
a battle cruiser would have no difficulty at all in setting the
final seal on the work which Albert Brown had achieved at
the cost of his life.  The tea ships and meat ships and sugar
ships, the ships carrying troops and the ships carrying
bullion, would pass to and fro across the southern waters
without <i>Ziethen</i> to sink and burn them.
</p>

<p>
Yet although Captain von Lutz was so convinced of the
approaching destruction of his ship, he had no thought
of giving up the game without at least a final struggle.
Vigorous messages passed to the engine-room, and soon
<i>Ziethen's</i> boilers were filled up with every ounce of steam
they could bear.  Night was not far off, and if thick weather
came with it <i>Ziethen</i> had a chance of escape, or, on the
other hand, she might have a chance of closing with her
adversaries and doing as much damage as she herself
received.  The pursuit must be prolonged until dark, and it
was with an anxious eye that Captain von Lutz scanned the
horizon as he paced about the bridge, the while officers and
men laboured furiously making every preparation for a
fight for life, stripping the ship of every conceivable
combustible material, handling ammunition, and testing
range-finders and gunnery controls; such is the queer nature of
mankind that the imminent prospect of a fight in which
every single man of them might lose his life cheered them
all up immensely, and the depression and indiscipline which
had settled upon the ship after the ineffective attempts
upon Resolution vanished like mist.
</p>

<p>
Night came while <i>Leopard</i> was still out of sight, and
<i>Ziethen</i> began her attempts either to throw off <i>Penzance's</i>
pursuits or else to close with her.  But the night was clear,
and <i>Penzance's</i> speed was one-third as much again as
<i>Ziethen's</i>.  An hour after nightfall the moon rose, and it
was an easy enough matter for the look-outs on <i>Penzance</i> to
pick up the loom of the big cruiser in the darkness.  <i>Ziethen</i>
turned sixteen points and came charging back straight up
her own wake, but <i>Penzance</i> saw her and kept out of her
way.  <i>Ziethen</i> resumed her old course, maintained it for
half an hour, and then turned two points to starboard.  That
time <i>Penzance</i> nearly lost her, but her great speed enabled
her to zigzag down the original course and find her quarry
again.  Before midnight the long expected help
came&mdash;<i>Leopard</i> with her 12-inch guns and twenty-four knots.
Then the two English ships were able to take up positions
comfortably on <i>Ziethen's</i> port and starboard quarters so
that the wretched cruiser's chance of escape, small enough
to begin with, were now much less than half what they were.
</p>

<p>
All through the night the three ships drove on southwards
through the Pacific.  The Germans had no friends at
sea within two thousand miles, and they were acutely and
uncomfortably conscious of the menacing, silent presence
of the British ships which were following after them, like
Death on his pale horse.  Twice already that night, in the
hope that the shadowy cruiser which had hovered after
them was within range, had they switched on searchlights
and blasted the night with a salvo, but each time they had
gained no profit from the performance save for the very
definite comfort of noise and action.  It seemed to temper
down in their minds the terrible inevitability of the morrow.
</p>

<p>
But it could not be said that discipline was faltering.
German naval <i>esprit de corps</i> was of new but sturdy
growth.  Every single man on board (for the rumour had run
round, as lower-deck rumours will) knew that a battle
cruiser was close upon them and that further resistance was
hopeless, yet no word was breathed of surrender and hardly
a man would have given his vote in favour of surrender.  A
young navy cannot afford to begin its traditions with a
record of that sort.  German sailors must fight to the death,
so that those that follow after might have at least a glorious
failure to look back upon.  Four hundred men must die for
that sole purpose; at least let it be recorded that they died
not unwillingly.
</p>

<p>
With the first faint beginnings of daylight Captain
Saville-Samarez gave orders to reduce speed below the nineteen
knots at which <i>Leopard</i> had been ploughing through the
sea since her junction with <i>Penzance</i>.  He was going to take
no chances, with those stringent passages from his
instructions running in his mind.  Daylight was not going to find
him anywhere nearly in range of <i>Ziethen's</i> 6-inch guns.
Even he, phlegmatic and confident though he was, had
found the tension and excitement too great for sleep.  He
had been pacing about all night, the while the crackling
wireless was sending through the relay ships to the
Admiralty in Whitehall the glad news that one at least of
the German Pacific Squadron was within the grip of the
British Navy.  Before dawn a reply had reached him, and he
knew that the K.C.B. he desired would be his by the end of
the year&mdash;if only he did what was expected of him.
</p>

<p>
And when daylight was almost come Captain von Lutz
on <i>Ziethen's</i> bridge knew that his last hope was gone.  Far
away on the horizon, almost dead astern, his powerful
glasses could make out through the clear atmosphere the
unmistakable tripod mast of a Dreadnought battle cruiser.
There was death in that insignificant little speck.  Still there
was some chance of doing damage.  <i>Penzance</i> lay closer in,
on the starboard quarter.  <i>Ziethen</i> wheeled, with her guns
reaching up to extreme elevation.  As the sun's disc cleared
the sea a crashing salvo broke forth from her side, but the
range was too great.  The columns of water where the shells
fell rose from the surface of the sea nearly half a mile from
the target.  Five seconds later <i>Penzance</i>, in obedience to an
irritated signal from <i>Leopard</i>, had turned away and was
racing out of danger at her full twenty-seven knots, clearing
the range for the 12-inch guns.
</p>

<p>
On <i>Leopard's</i> bridge stood Captain Saville-Samarez.  The
conning tower was no place for him during this affair.  The
whole business would be as dangerous as shooting a sitting
rabbit; and Captain Saville-Samarez had taken <i>Leopard</i>
into Heligoland Bight astern of <i>Lion</i>, and from the bridge
had seen <i>Mainz</i> blown to pieces by the shattering salvoes.
Now he saw <i>Ziethen</i> swing eastwards, racing towards the
level sun in one last hope of distracting the aim of the
English gunners.  But <i>Leopard</i> turned eastward too, steering
a parallel course with the sun dead ahead and her guns
training out to port.  Eight 12-inch guns composed
<i>Leopard's</i> main armament; and the 12-inch gun had twice
the range of the 6-inch gun and fired a shell eight times as
heavy, with a shattering effect twenty times as great.
</p>

<p>
<i>Leopard</i> turned two points to port to get <i>Ziethen</i>
comfortably within range, resumed her original course, and
battle began.  One gun from each turret volleyed forth in its
deafening, appalling thunder, and four 12-inch shells went
soaring forth on their ten-mile flight.  Each shell weighed
half a ton, and between them they contained enough
explosive to lay all the City of London in ruins.  Woe betide
<i>Ziethen</i> with her half-hearted attempt at armour plating
and her fragile upper works!
</p>

<p>
'Short,' said the Gunnery Commander up in the gunnery
control tower, watching with detached professional interest
the shooting of his beloved guns.  'Up two hundred.'
</p>

<p>
The other four guns bellowed in their turn, and the half-ton
shells shrieked out on their flight&mdash;ten miles in half a
minute, reaching two miles up into the air as they went.
</p>

<p>
'Short,' said the Gunnery Commander again.  The four
immense columns of water were well this side of the racing
armoured cruiser.  'Up two hundred.  This blasted climate's
played Old Harry with the cordite!'
</p>

<p>
Punctually at twenty-five-second intervals the salvoes
blared forth from the fifty-foot-long turret guns.
</p>

<p>
'Over,' said the Gunnery Commander.  'Short.  Hit.  Hit.
Hit.  Over.'
</p>

<p>
Three times in a minute and a half <i>Ziethen</i> was struck
by a ton of steel containing a ton of high explosive.  The
wretched ship's upper works were shattered and flung
about, the steel plates were twisted and torn as though they
were sheets of paper in a giant's hands.  One shell burst
fair and true on the breech of a starboard side 6-inch gun,
wiped out the gun's crew and pitched the gun overside.  But
there was still life in the ship; the black cross still streamed
out on its white ground from the tottering mast.  Round she
came, trying feebly to close with the enemy&mdash;just as, five
days before, <i>Charybdis</i> had tried to do.  But <i>Leopard</i> did as
<i>Ziethen</i> had done then; she turned away at full speed,
keeping her distance while the target moved slowly back
abaft the beam.  It was a hopeless effort to seek to close
even to 6-inch gun range; there was no chance at all of
being able to use torpedoes with effect.
</p>

<p>
'Hit,' said the Gunnery Commander.  'Over.  Hit.  Hit.  My
God!'
</p>

<p>
The 12-inch shells had blasted away great holes in the
unarmoured upper works; one had blown a gap in the
horizontal protective deck.  The Gunnery Commander saw
her lurching through the waves, smoke&mdash;furnace smoke,
and shell fumes, and smoke from fires&mdash;pouring from every
crevice; but she was still a ship; she still moved, she still
floated; she might still fire her guns.  But two shells from the
last salvo crashed through the protective deck and burst
amid her very vitals.  Boilers and magazines alike exploded
in one huge detonation.  The rending flash was visible in the
strong tropical sunshine for a tiny instant as the ship blew
apart before the merciful black smoke bellied out and hid
everything from view.  Then, as this cleared before the fresh
breeze, there was nothing to be seen, nothing.  <i>Ziethen</i> had
gone the way of <i>Good Hope</i> and <i>Monmouth</i>, the way
<i>Scharnhorst</i> was to go, and <i>Defence</i> and <i>Black Prince</i>,
armoured cruisers all, sunk with all hands by gunfire.
Twelve salvoes had done it&mdash;hardly more than five minutes'
firing.  Every man on board had perished, including two
Englishmen, the leading signalman and Ginger Harris,
whom Brown had tended; but of course the English ships
did not know of their existence on board&mdash;and never would.
</p>

<p>
The black smoke eddied away, upward and to one side,
and <i>Leopard</i> and <i>Penzance</i> raced for the spot where
<i>Ziethen</i> had been.  They found little enough: a dead
man&mdash;half a man, rather&mdash;a few floating bits of wreckage,
and nothing else.  Iron ships stripped for action have
little enough on board that will float.  Then <i>Leopard's</i>
triumphant wireless proclaimed the news far and wide&mdash;a
welcome little victory, come just in time to counter the
depression resulting from the defeat of Coronel, the sinking
of <i>Cressy</i>, <i>Hogue</i> and <i>Aboukir</i>, and the depredations of
<i>Emden</i>.  It was England's proclamation of the mastery of
the seas, to be confirmed within a week by <i>Sydney's</i>
fortunate encounter with <i>Emden</i>, and within a month by
Sturdee's annihilation of von Spee, where once again
12-inch guns blew armoured cruisers to destruction.
</p>

<p>
Then Captain Saville-Samarez was free to turn his ship
back to England, to the misty North Sea for which he
pined, and the prospects of 'The Day.'  He was to take
<i>Leopard</i> into the clamorous, bloody confusion of Jutland
when the battle cruisers raced into action with <i>Lion</i> leading,
and he was to stand watch and ward with the others amid
the tempestuous Shetlands, but that was his great day.  As
he had foreseen, he became known as 'the man who sank
the <i>Ziethen</i>.'  But nobody was to know to whom the
destruction of that ship was really due.
</p>
