<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
			<p>The record of Brown’s doings while <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> fought <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> is not material to this history. He was only a part of a whole, and whatever he did the credit belongs not to him, but to the Navy, the tremendous institution which had trained him and disciplined him. If in the last few desperate moments he fought his gun without superior direction, that was because handling a 4.7 under all conditions had been grained into his nature; the credit should rather go to the whiskered admirals of an earlier epoch who had laid down the instructions for gun drill. Brown was a brave man, and he did not flinch from his post, but many men less brave than he would have done the same had they been parts of the same whole. It was the Navy of the unrivalled past which gained glory from the defeat of this, an inconsiderable fraction of itself, just as that same Navy must bear the blame, if blame there is. That is as it should be, but at the same time the argument hands over to Brown all the glory and honour for what he did on Resolution, and to Brown as an individual must be given the credit for the eventual destruction of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i>. For he acted on Resolution without orders, on his own keen initiative, under conditions where neither discipline nor training could help him.</p>
			<p>That was all still in the future, however, and not one of the German boat’s crew which picked him up as they pulled through the scattered wreckage knew that they would soon meet their deaths through the agency of this shaken fragment of humanity. Very thoroughly did the boat’s crew search, rowing hither and yon over the oil-streaked water, but they found little. There were two dead men⁠—one of them so shattered that he hardly appeared human⁠—two or three wounded, and one merely half-stunned; this last was a stoutly-built fellow of medium height, very freckled, with hard grey eyes and light-brown hair, inclined to be as rebellious as was possible within the narrow limits of its close crop. He was very badly shaken, having been blown from the deck to the water when the magazine exploded, and he was hardly conscious of holding on to a stray rolled hammock which came to the surface providentially near him when <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> sank. He lay limp in the bottom of the boat as it rowed back to <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i>, and he had to be assisted to the ship’s deck.</p>
			<p>All he wanted at that time was to allow his weakness to overcome him, to fall to the deck and sleep heavily, but the exigencies of war would not allow him that luxury. He was the only one of the three survivors of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> who was even half conscious, and Captain Lutz, bearing on his shoulders the responsibility for <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> and her hundreds of men, must know at once how <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> came to be where she was; whether she had consorts near who could have heard her wireless, whether the meeting was intentional or accidental⁠—everything, in fact, which would enable him to spin out his little hour in being. They did not treat Brown unkindly; they dried him and gave him spirits and wrapped him in a comfortable woollen nightshirt and allowed him to sit in a chair in the dispensary beside the sickbay while he was being questioned.</p>
			<p>Brown rolled dazed eyes over his questioners as he sat huddled in his chair. The bearded officer with the four rings of gold lace must be <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i>’s captain, he knew; the young officer was a sublieutenant; the shirt-sleeved man was the Surgeon (who had been doing gory work on the half-dozen wounded <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i>’ shells had injured), and the naval rating in the background was the sickbay steward.</p>
			<p>Fierce and keen were the Captain’s questions, uttered in a guttural and toneless English; occasionally the Captain would turn and speak explosively in German to the Sublieutenant, who in turn would address Brown in an English far purer and without a trace of accent. Brown made halting replies, his eyelids drooping with weariness. He told of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i>’ slow progress through the Carolines and Marshalls, and steady course eastwards across the Pacific. No, he did not know of any other English ship near. He had heard nothing of any concentration against the German squadron. It was at this point that the Captain called upon the Sublieutenant to interpret, and the Sublieutenant duly informed Brown in passionless tones that a prisoner who made false statements was guilty of espionage, and as such was liable to be shot, and undoubtedly in this instance would be shot.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Brown.</p>
			<p>“Was <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> expecting to encounter <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i>?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said Brown.</p>
			<p>“What was her course and destination at the time of meeting?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said Brown.</p>
			<p>“Now, did he want to be well treated while he was on board?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Brown.</p>
			<p>Then let him answer their questions sensibly. Whither was <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> bound?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know,” said Brown, and at this point the medical officer intervened, and Captain Lutz left him testily. Brown had been speaking the truth when he said he did not know; but he had a very shrewd idea all the same, and had he told Captain Lutz of his suspicions he might have relieved that officer of a great burden of worry. But that was no way Brown’s business⁠—on the contrary. Captain Lutz’s ill-timed threat had reminded him of the fact at the very moment when, in his half-dazed condition, he was likely in reply to kindly questioning to have told all he knew or thought.</p>
			<p>The Surgeon spoke to the sickbay steward, who summoned a colleague, and between them they tucked Brown into a cot in the sickbay, put a hot bottle at his feet (shock had left him cold and weak) and allowed him to fall away into that deep, intense sleep for which his every fibre seemed to be clamouring. And while Brown slept <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> came round on her heel and headed back eastwards.</p>
			<p>For <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> had not gone to the bottom quite without exacting some compensation. One of her 4.7-inch shells had struck <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> fair and true a foot above the waterline, and a yard forward of the limits of her armour belt. There the shell had burst, smashing a great hole through which the sea raced in such a volume that the pumps were hard put to it to keep the water from gaining until, after the battle, a sweating work party had got a collision mat over the hole, while inside the stokers cleared the bunker, into which the hole opened, of the coal which interfered with the work of the pumps. Examination of the damage showed it to be extensive. Nowhere else on all the side of the ship could a shell of that calibre have been put to better use. The forward armour plate, starboard side, was slightly buckled and loose on its rivets; there was a hole in the skin ten feet across, one-third of it below water, and, worst of all, the bulkhead and watertight door between the injured compartment and the next (the boiler compartment, and largest of all) were involved in the damage as well. The ship was actually in danger; in smooth water she had nothing to fear, but, given a Pacific gale and Pacific rollers, the collision mat inevitably torn off, and the pumps choked with coal-dust, two compartments might fill and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> would go to join <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> on the bottom.</p>
			<p>Clearly it meant the postponement of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i>’s projected raid. The New Zealand meat ships and the Australian convoys would be left in peace for the time. No captain would risk his ship on a long voyage in such a condition, least of all the captain of a German warship with no friends within five thousand miles, with the constant possibility of a battle at any moment, and the certainty of one sooner or later. <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> must find a harbour, a haven of some sort, where she could rest while her shattered hull was being patched, and that without delay. A neutral port would mean almost certain internment, the most ignominious ending possible to a voyage; or if by any miracle she was not interned, her presence would be broadcast far and wide, and on her exit from neutral waters she would find awaiting her an overwhelming force of the enemy. So that ports with docks and stores and necessaries were barred to her. She must find somewhere a deserted piece of land from which news would not spread, where she would be able to find shelter while her own artificers forged and fixed new plates, and where it was unlikely that enemy warships would find her or inquisitive Government officials complain of breaches of neutrality. In the Pacific there was more than one such haven, but the nearest was far superior to all others; Captain Lutz knew the answer to the question he set himself before even he had found it by consultation of charts and sailing directions. Resolution Island, that last, most northerly outlier of the Galapagos Archipelago, would suit him best of all. So <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> set her course for Resolution Island, a thousand miles away, her pumps at work, while a relay of sweating artificers down in the Stygian depths of her toiled to keep them clear. Brown slept the heavy, exhausting sleep of profound shock the while <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i>’s propellers beat their monotonous rhythm, driving her onwards to where Brown’s fate awaited him.</p>
			<p>He slept all the rest of the day and most of the night. And though he had the sailor’s habit of sound sleep and the readiness of sleep of the strong-minded, towards morning he was wakened more than once by a painful, unexplainable noise, a bubbling howl which in his sleepy condition appeared to him to be neither human nor connected with the ship. It died away each time, however, and he slept again, but in the morning, when he was fully awake, he heard it again. It seemed to come from the other side of the bulkhead, and he could not explain it to himself. He looked about him; he was alone, although there was another empty cot in the cabin. The interior was a cool white, and a whirling electric fan helped out the portholes in their business of ventilation, but the air which came in hardly seemed to cool the cabin. For <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> was almost on the Equator, and iron decks and iron bulkheads mean a sweltering heat under a vertical sun. The heat was dry and redolent of hot metal, but Brown was used to it; two years on the lower deck in the tropics had made such a state of affairs almost normal to him.</p>
			<p>Brown had not much time to think before the sickbay steward he remembered from yesterday entered the cabin. His jolly German face creased into a smile as he saw Brown normal and conscious again. He put a thermometer into Brown’s mouth, and smiled again as he read it and noted the result on the chart at the head of the cot. He spoke to him amicably, and grinned as he realized that Brown did not understand a word he said. He made Brown comfortable as dexterously as a nurse might, twitched the blankets into place and smoothed the bedclothes and waddled away with a friendly look over his shoulder. Ten minutes later he returned with the Surgeon.</p>
			<p>“Bedder, eh?” said that officer with a glance at the chart. Automatically he took Brown’s wrist and produced his watch simultaneously, felt his pulse and nodded.</p>
			<p>“Any bain any blace?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“No, sir,” said Brown.</p>
			<p>“Feeling all right, eh?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“You can haf breagfast, den.”</p>
			<p>The Surgeon spoke to the steward, who vanished and returned almost at once. He brought good grey bread and tinned butter, and coffee which was not as good as either; but Brown relished it all. As the Surgeon retired the steward brought him a bundle of clothes⁠—shirt and jumper and loose trousers, and socks and shoes; they were the white duck uniform of a German sailor, and Brown put them on, a little troubled by the minor differences between it and the English naval uniform⁠—the collar, for example, had to be buttoned awkwardly inside⁠—but the general fit was not too bad. The plump steward still grinned in elephantine friendliness.</p>
			<p>The rest of the morning passed. The Commander, cold-eyed and detached, came in on a round of inspection, ran his eye over him and went his way without a word. Then he was led once more into the presence of the Captain and searchingly questioned. Brown did his best not to give information; he fell back when hard-pressed upon a stolid, brainless stupidity, and the most penetrating questions rattled harmlessly from his “I don’t knows.” And since it was extremely probable that a mere leading seaman from an isolated cruiser should know nothing, the Captain in the end dropped the inquisition. And, after all, it is doubtful if anything Brown could have told him would have added to Captain von Lutz’s information. The Captain was about to dismiss him when the Sublieutenant interposed with a respectful question. The Captain thought for a moment, exchanged a few sentences with the Sublieutenant, and uttered his verdict. It was verdict settling Brown’s fate⁠—and the fate of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> too, but no one was to know that.</p>
			<p>Brown heard of the decision on his return to the sickbay.</p>
			<p>“You are to helb here,” said the Surgeon to him.</p>
			<p>Brown could only stare without understanding, and the Surgeon (with enormous condescension on the part of an officer towards a man in ordinary seaman’s uniform) explained in a fatherly manner.</p>
			<p>“What are we to do wit you on board here?” he asked. “Pud you in prison? Prison is not good in the dropigs. You gan ztay and helb nurse your vrients. You will not run away, we know.”</p>
			<p>And he laughed throatily; Brown did not realize how exceedingly condescending it was on the part even of a noncombatant German officer to crack a joke with a seaman.</p>
			<p>It was thus that Brown learned the explanation of the groaning noise of the night before. The plump steward led him into the adjoining ward of the sickbay. There on two cots lay two wrecks of men. One had his head half swathed in bandages, through which once more a red stain was beginning to show. He lay on his back in the cot with his fingers writhing, and through a shapeless hole in the bandages over his mouth there came a continued low, bubbling groan⁠—low now, but clearly likely to rise at any moment to that higher penetrating pitch Brown remembered so well. Half a forehead and one eye remained uncovered to show Brown that beneath the bandages lay what had once been the homely, friendly features of Ginger Harris, a messmate of his and a bosom friend of two years’ standing. There was no hint of recognition in that one eye of Ginger’s when it opened; all Ginger’s thoughts were at present concentrated upon himself. Later, when Brown saw what was beneath the bandages, he was not surprised.</p>
			<p>The second cot was occupied by a leading signalman whom Brown did not know at all well, and he hardly recognized him because of the marble-like pallor which had overspread his face; he was so thin and so exceedingly pale⁠—even his lips were white⁠—that he was more like a soulless visitor from another world as he lay motionless in the cot. Brown wondered what was the injury from which he was suffering, and looked inquiringly at the fat steward. The latter soon enlightened him; he indicated a bulge beneath the bedclothes, whirled his arms round like a windmill, said “Sh-sh,” and tapped his leg. Brown gasped his meaning; the leading signalman had come within reach of one of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i>’ gigantic propellers as she sank and had lost his leg. Perhaps he had been lucky in that the whirling blades had not cut him to mincemeat instead of merely hacking off a limb, but Brown realized that there could be two opinions about that.</p>
			<p>So that he and these two wrecks were the sole survivors of the four hundred and odd men who had constituted the crew of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i>. Four hundred dead men were drifting in the middle depths of the Pacific, a prey for the shark and the squid. It had been a vain, frantic sacrifice, part of the price the Navy must pay for the glory of keeping the bellies of an unthinking population charged with their accustomed meat and bread. Brown could picture, back in England, the arrival of the news of the loss of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charybdis</i> with all hands. The tea-parties would say, “Dear me, how sad!” and go on talking about cancer of the womb; and the business offices would say, “Mismanagement somewhere, of course,” and revert to the Cesarewitch or the delinquencies of office boys. Brown had no illusions about that. He knew how little the people for whom he was fighting appreciated his services and those of his fellows. They might inflate themselves with pride over having the largest Navy in the world, and sing little songs about “Britannia, the Pride of the Ocean,” and stand a bluejacket a drink, and the better read might talk hazily about “the command of the sea”; but of the irresistible strength of sea power, of the profundity of study and research and self-sacrifice necessary to employ it⁠—or of what lay beneath Ginger Harris’s bandages⁠—they knew nothing. Brown’s upper lip rose a little, and his blunt chin came forward at the same time. None of that affected his determination to do his duty; his duty to the Navy to himself and (although he would not think of it in those words) to the memory of his mother. He would help feed the babbling mob of civilians, if he could, but not for the civilians’ sake.</p>
			<p>Later he found himself jeering bitterly at himself for his highfalutin determinations. He was a prisoner in the hands of the enemy, and helpless. He could think of no means to hold back <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> from her mission of destruction. As soon as her side was repaired she would go off capturing and sinking British ships, just as <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Emden</i> was doing. Five million pounds was a small estimate of the cost of her probable sinkings. And he would be forced to witness them⁠—or else, with contemptuous carelessness, he might be put on board a neutral vessel to find his way home while <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> continued her career. There was nothing he could do. He knew too much about the internal discipline of a ship to hope to disable the engines or bring off any other boy’s adventure book coup, although it must be admitted that he tried to think of some scheme to achieve some such end. Helplessness and despair and loneliness combined to force him into frightful despondency⁠—the utter black misery of the twenty-year-old⁠—during the three days that <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ziethen</i> was ploughing her crippled way to Resolution.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
